Chapter	Verse	Unformatted Text (Pure Text Only)	Formatted Text (with Punctuations)	Metawords_Keywords
11	1	A false balance is an abomination to the Lord but a just weight is his delight	A false balance is an abomination to the Lord, but a just weight is his delight.	false, balance, abomination, weight, delight
11	2	When pride comes then comes disgrace but with the humble is wisdom	When pride comes, then comes disgrace, but with the humble is wisdom.	pride, disgrace, humble, wisdom
11	3	The integrity of the upright guides them but the crookedness of the treacherous destroys them	The integrity of the upright guides them, but the crookedness of the treacherous destroys them.	integrity, upright, crookedness, treacherous, destroys
11	4	Riches do not profit in the day of wrath but righteousness delivers from death	Riches do not profit in the day of wrath, but righteousness delivers from death.	riches, profit, day, wrath, righteousness, delivers, death
11	5	The righteousness of the blameless keeps his way straight but the wicked falls by his own wickedness	The righteousness of the blameless keeps his way straight, but the wicked falls by his own wickedness.	righteousness, blameless, keeps, straight, wicked, falls, wickedness
11	6	The righteousness of the upright delivers them but the treacherous are taken captive by their lust	The righteousness of the upright delivers them, but the treacherous are taken captive by their lust. 	righteousness, upright, delivers, treacherous, captive, lust
11	7	When the wicked dies his hope will perish and the expectation of wealth perishes too	When the wicked dies, his hope will perish, and the expectation of wealth perishes too.	wicked, dies, hope, perish, expectation, wealth, perishes
11	8	The righteous is delivered from trouble and the wicked walks into it instead	The righteous is delivered from trouble, and the wicked walks into it instead.	righteous, delivered, trouble, wicked, walks, perishes
11	9	With his mouth the godless man would destroy his neighbor but by knowledge the righteous are delivered	With his mouth the godless man would destroy his neighbor, but by knowledge the righteous are delivered.	mouth, godless, man, destroy, neighbor, knowledge, righteous, delivered
11	10	When it goes well with the righteous the city rejoices and when the wicked perish there are shouts of gladness	When it goes well with the righteous, the city rejoices, and when the wicked perish there are shouts of gladness.	well, righteous, city, rejoices, wicked, perish, shouts, gladness
11	11	By the blessing of the upright a city is exalted but by the mouth of the wicked it is overthrown	By the blessing of the upright a city is exalted, but by the mouth of the wicked it is overthrown.	blessing, upright, city, exalted, mouth, wicked, overthrown
11	12	Whoever belittles his neighbor lacks sense but a man of understanding remains silent	Whoever belittles his neighbor lacks sense, but a man of understanding remains silent.	belittles, neighbor, lacks, sense, man, understanding, remains, silent
11	13	Whoever goes about slandering reveals secrets but he who is trustworthy in spirit keeps a thing covered	Whoever goes about slandering reveals secrets, but he who is trustworthy in spirit keeps a thing covered.	slandering, reveals, secrets, trustworthy, spirit, keeps, thing, covered
11	14	Where there is no guidance a people falls but in an abundance of counselors there is safety	Where there is no guidance, a people falls, but in an abundance of counselors there is safety.	guidance, falls, abundance, counselors, safety
11	15	Whoever puts up security for a stranger will surely suffer harm but he who hates striking hands in pledge is secure	Whoever puts up security for a stranger will surely suffer harm, but he who hates striking hands in pledge is secure.	security, stranger, suffer, harm, hates, stricking, hands, pledge, secure
11	16	A gracious woman gets honor and violent men get riches	A gracious woman gets honor, and violent men get riches.	gracious, woman, honor, violent, men, riches
11	17	A man who is kind benefits himself but a cruel man hurts himself	A man who is kind benefits himself, but a cruel man hurts himself.	man, kind, benefits, cruel, hurts, himself
11	18	The wicked earns deceptive wages but one who sows righteousness gets a sure reward	The wicked earns deceptive wages, but one who sows righteousness gets a sure reward.	wicked, earns, deceptive, wages, sows, righteousness, sure, reward
11	19	Whoever is steadfast in righteousness will live but he who pursues evil will die	Whoever is steadfast in righteousness will live, but he who pursues evil will die.	steadfast, righteousness, live, pursues, evil, die
11	20	Those of crooked heart are an abomination to the Lord but those of blameless ways are his delight	Those of crooked heart are an abomination to the Lord, but those of blameless ways are his delight.	crooked, heart, abomination, Lord, blameless, ways, delight
11	21	Be assured an evil person will not go unpunished but the offspring of the righteous will be delivered	Be assured, an evil person will not go unpunished, but the offspring of the righteous will be delivered.	assured, evil, person, unpunished, offspring, righteousness, delivered
11	22	Like a gold ring in a pigs snout is a beautiful woman without discretion	Like a gold ring in a pig’s snout is a beautiful woman without discretion.	gold, ring, pig, snout, beautiful, woman, discretion
11	23	The desire of the righteous ends only in good the expectation of the wicked in wrath	The desire of the righteous ends only in good, the expectation of the wicked in wrath.	desire, righteous, ends, only, good, expectation, wicked, wrath
11	24	One gives freely yet grows all the richer another withholds what he should give and only suffers want	One gives freely, yet grows all the richer; another withholds what he should give, and only suffers want.	freely, grows, richer, withholds, suffers
11	25	Whoever brings blessing will be enriched and one who waters will himself be watered	Whoever brings blessing will be enriched, and one who waters will himself be watered.	brings, blessing, enriched, waters, himself, watered
11	26	The people curse him who holds back grain but a blessing is on the head of him who sells it	The people curse him who holds back grain, but a blessing is on the head of him who sells it.	people, curse, holds, back, grain, blessing, head, him, sells
11	27	Whoever diligently seeks good seeks favor but evil comes to him who searches for it	Whoever diligently seeks good seeks favor but evil comes to him who searches for it.	diligently, seeks, good, favor, evil, him, searches
11	28	Whoever trusts in his riches will fall but the righteous will flourish like a green leaf	Whoever trusts in his riches will fall, but the righteous will flourish like a green leaf.	trusts, riches, fall, righteous, flourish, green, leaf
11	29	Whoever troubles his own household will inherit the wind and the fool will be servant to the wise of heart	Whoever troubles his own household will inherit the wind, and the fool will be servant to the wise of heart.	troubles, household, inherit, wind, fool, servant, wise, heart
11	30	The fruit of the righteous is a tree of life and whoever captures souls is wise	The fruit of the righteous is a tree of life, and whoever captures souls is wise.	fruit, righteous, tree, life, captures, souls, wise
11	31	If the righteous is repaid on earth how much more the wicked and the sinner	If the righteous is repaid on earth, how much more the wicked and the sinner!	righteous, repaid, earth, wicked, sinner
12	1	Whoever loves discipline loves knowledge but he who hates reproof is stupid	Whoever loves discipline loves knowledge, but he who hates reproof is stupid.	wine, mocker, strong drink, brawler, led astray, not wise
12	2	A good man obtains favor from the Lord but a man of evil devices he condemns	A good man obtains favor from the Lord, but a man of evil devices he condemns.	way, fool, right, own eyes, wise man, listens, advice
12	3	No one is established by wickedness but the root of the righteous will never be moved	No one is established by wickedness, but the root of the righteous will never be moved.	established, wickedness, root, righteous, never moved
12	4	An excellent wife is the crown of her husband but she who brings shame is like rottenness in his bones	An excellent wife is the crown of her husband, but she who brings shame is like rottenness in his bones.	excellent, wife, crown, husband, brings shame, rottenness, bones
12	5	The thoughts of the righteous are just the counsels of the wicked are deceitful	The thoughts of the righteous are just; the counsels of the wicked are deceitful.	thoughts, righteous, just, counsels, wicked, deceitful
12	6	The words of the wicked lie in wait for blood but the mouth of the upright delivers them	The words of the wicked lie in wait for blood, but the mouth of the upright delivers them.	words, wicked, lie in wait, blood, mouth, upright, delivers
12	7	The wicked are overthrown and are no more but the house of the righteous will stand	The wicked are overthrown and are no more, but the house of the righteous will stand.	wicked, overthrown, no more, house, righteous, stand
12	8	A man is commended according to his good sense but one of twisted mind is despised	A man is commended according to his good sense, but one of twisted mind is despised.	commended, good sense, twisted mind, despised
12	9	Better to be lowly and have a servant than to play the great man and lack bread	Better to be lowly and have a servant than to play the great man and lack bread.	lowly, servant, play, great man, lack, bread
12	10	Whoever is righteous has regard for the life of his beast but the mercy of the wicked is cruel	Whoever is righteous has regard for the life of his beast, but the mercy of the wicked is cruel.	righteous, regard, life, beast, mercy, wicked, cruel
12	11	Whoever works his land will have plenty of bread but he who follows worthless pursuits lacks sense	Whoever works his land will have plenty of bread, but he who follows worthless pursuits lacks sense.	works, land, plenty, bread, follows, worthless pursuits, lacks, sense
12	12	Whoever is wicked covets the spoil of evildoers but the root of the righteous bears fruit	Whoever is wicked covets the spoil of evildoers, but the root of the righteous bears fruit.	wicked, covets, spoil, evildoers, root, righteous, bears, fruit
12	13	An evil man is ensnared by the transgression of his lips but the righteous escapes from trouble	An evil man is ensnared by the transgression of his lips, but the righteous escapes from trouble.	evil man, ensnared, transgression, lips, righteous, escapes, trouble
12	14	From the fruit of his mouth a man is satisfied with good and the work of a mans hand comes back to him	From the fruit of his mouth a man is satisfied with good, and the work of a man's hand comes back to him.	evil man, ensnared, transgression, lips, righteous, escapes, trouble
12	15	The way of a fool is right in his own eyes but a wise man listens to advice	The way of a fool is right in his own eyes, but a wise man listens to advice.	way, fool, right, own eyes, wise man, listens, advice
12	16	The vexation of a fool is known at once but the prudent ignores an insult	The vexation of a fool is known at once, but the prudent ignores an insult.	vexation, fool, known at once, prudent, ignores, insult
12	17	Whoever speaks the truth gives honest evidence but a false witness utters deceit	Whoever speaks the truth gives honest evidence, but a false witness utters deceit.	speaks, truth, honest evidence, false witness, utters, deceit
12	18	There is one whose rash words are like sword thrusts but the tongue of the wise brings healing	There is one whose rash words are like sword thrusts, but the tongue of the wise brings healing.	rash words, sword thrusts, tongue, wise, brings, healing
12	19	Truthful lips endure forever but a lying tongue is but for a moment	Truthful lips endure forever, but a lying tongue is but for a moment.	truthful lips, endure, forever, lying tongue, moment
12	20	Deceit is in the heart of those who devise evil but those who plan peace have joy	Deceit is in the heart of those who devise evil, but those who plan peace have joy.	deceit, heart, devise, evil, plan, peace, joy
12	21	No ill befalls the righteous but the wicked are filled with trouble	No ill befalls the righteous, but the wicked are filled with trouble.	ill befalls, righteous, wicked, filled, trouble
12	22	Lying lips are an abomination to the Lord but those who act faithfully are his delight	Lying lips are an abomination to the Lord, but those who act faithfully are his delight.	lying lips, abomination, Lord, act, faithfully, delight
12	23	A prudent man conceals knowledge but the heart of fools proclaims folly	A prudent man conceals knowledge, but the heart of fools proclaims folly.	prudent man, conceals, knowledge, heart, fools, proclaims, folly
12	24	The hand of the diligent will rule while the slothful will be put to forced labor	The hand of the diligent will rule, while the slothful will be put to forced labor.	hand, diligent, rule, slothful, forced, labor
12	25	Anxiety in a mans heart weighs him down but a good word makes him glad	Anxiety in a man's heart weighs him down, but a good word makes him glad.	anxiety, man's heart, weighs down, good word, glad
12	26	One who is righteous is a guide to his neighbor but the way of the wicked leads them astray	One who is righteous is a guide to his neighbor, but the way of the wicked leads them astray.	righteous, guide, neighbor, wicked, leads astray
12	27	Whoever is slothful will not roast his game but the diligent man will get precious wealth	Whoever is slothful will not roast his game, but the diligent man will get precious wealth.	slothful, roast, game, diligent man, precious, wealth
12	28	In the path of righteousness is life and in its pathway there is no death	In the path of righteousness is life, and in its pathway there is no death.	path, righteousness, life, pathway, no death
13	1	A wise son hears his fathers instruction but a scoffer does not listen to rebuke	A wise son hears his father's instruction, but a scoffer does not listen to rebuke.	wise, son, hears, father's instruction, scoffer, does not listen, rebuke 
13	2	From the fruit of his mouth a man eats what is good but the desire of the treacherous is for violence	From the fruit of his mouth a man eats what is good, but the desire of the treacherous is for violence.	fruit of mouth, man, eats, good, desire, treacherous, violence
13	3	Whoever guards his mouth preserves his life he who opens wide his lips comes to ruin	Whoever guards his mouth preserves his life; he who opens wide his lips comes to ruin.	whoever, guards, mouth, preserves, life, opens wide, lips, comes to ruin
13	4	The soul of the sluggard craves and gets nothing while the soul of the diligent is richly supplied	The soul of the sluggard craves and gets nothing, while the soul of the diligent is richly supplied.	soul, sluggard, craves, gets, nothing, soul, diligent, richly supplied 
13	5	The righteous hates falsehood but the wicked brings shame and disgrace	The righteous hates falsehood, but the wicked brings shame and disgrace.	righteous, hates, falsehood, wicked, brings, shame, disgrace
13	6	Righteousness guards him whose way is blameless but sin overthrows the wicked	Righteousness guards him whose way is blameless, but sin overthrows the wicked.	righteousness, guards, way, blameless, sin, overthrows, wicked
13	7	One pretends to be rich yet has nothing another pretends to be poor yet has great wealth	One pretends to be rich, yet has nothing; another pretends to be poor, yet has great wealth.	pretends, rich, yet has nothing, pretends, poor, yet has great wealth
13	8	The ransom of a mans life is his wealth but a poor man hears no threat	The ransom of a man's life is his wealth, but a poor man hears no threat.	ransom, man's life, wealth, poor man, hears, no threat
13	9	The light of the righteous rejoices but the lamp of the wicked will be put out	The light of the righteous rejoices, but the lamp of the wicked will be put out.	light, righteous, rejoices, lamp, wicked, put out
13	10	By insolence comes nothing but strife but with those who take advice is wisdom	By insolence comes nothing but strife, but with those who take advice is wisdom.	insolence, comes, nothing, strife, take advice, wisdom
13	11	Wealth gained hastily will dwindle but whoever gathers little by little will increase it	Wealth gained hastily will dwindle, but whoever gathers little by little will increase it.	wealth gained hastily, will dwindle, gathers little by little, increase
13	12	Hope deferred makes the heart sick but a desire fulfilled is a tree of life	Hope deferred makes the heart sick, but a desire fulfilled is a tree of life.	hope deferred, makes, heart, sick, desire fulfilled, tree of life
13	13	Whoever despises the word brings destruction on himself but he who reveres the commandment will be rewarded	Whoever despises the word brings destruction on himself, but he who reveres the commandment will be rewarded.	despises, word, brings, destruction, himself, reveres, commandment
13	14	The teaching of the wise is a fountain of life that one may turn away from the snares of death	The teaching of the wise is a fountain of life, that one may turn away from the snares of death.	teaching of the wise, fountain of life, turn away, snares of death
13	15	Good sense wins favor but the way of the treacherous is their ruin	Good sense wins favor, but the way of the treacherous is their ruin.	good sense, wins, favor, way, treacherous, ruin
13	16	Every prudent man acts with knowledge but a fool flaunts his folly	Every prudent man acts with knowledge, but a fool flaunts his folly.	prudent man, acts, knowledge, fool, flaunts, folly
13	17	A wicked messenger falls into trouble but a faithful envoy brings healing	A wicked messenger falls into trouble, but a faithful envoy brings healing.	wicked messenger, falls, into trouble, faithful envoy, brings, healing
13	18	Poverty and disgrace come to him who ignores instruction but whoever heeds reproof is honored	Poverty and disgrace come to him who ignores instruction, but whoever heeds reproof is honored.	poverty, disgrace, comes, ignores, instruction, heeds, reproof, honored
13	19	A desire fulfilled is sweet to the soul but to turn away from evil is an abomination to fools	A desire fulfilled is sweet to the soul, but to turn away from evil is an abomination to fools.	desire fulfilled, sweet, soul, turn away from evil, abomination, fools
13	20	Whoever walks with the wise becomes wise but the companion of fools will suffer harm	Whoever walks with the wise becomes wise, but the companion of fools will suffer harm.	walks with the wise, becomes wise, companion of fools, will suffer harm
13	21	Disaster pursues sinners but the righteous are rewarded with good	Disaster pursues sinners, but the righteous are rewarded with good.	disaster pursues, sinners, righteous, rewarded with good
13	22	A good man leaves an inheritance to his childrens children but the sinners wealth is laid up for the just	A good man leaves an inheritance to his children's children, but the sinner's wealth is laid up for the just.	good man, leaves, inheritance, children's, sinner's wealth, laid up, just
13	23	The fallow ground of the poor would yield much food but it is swept away through injustice	The fallow ground of the poor would yield much food, but it is swept away through injustice.	fallow ground, poor, would yield, much food, swept away, through injustice
13	24	Whoever spares the rod hates his son but he who loves him is diligent to discipline him	Whoever spares the rod hates his son, but he who loves him is diligent to discipline him.	spares the rod, hates, son, loves him, diligent, discipline
13	25	The righteous has enough to satisfy his appetite but the belly of the wicked suffers want	The righteous has enough to satisfy his appetite, but the belly of the wicked suffers want.	righteous, has enough, satisfy, appetite, belly of wicked, suffers want
14	1	The wisest of women builds her house but folly with her own hands tears it down	The wisest of women builds her house, but folly with her own hands tears it down.	wisest, wise, women, diligence, behaviour
14	2	Whoever walks in uprightness fears the Lord but he who is devious in his ways despises him	Whoever walks in uprightness fears the Lord, but he who is devious in his ways despises him.	uprightness, fear, devious
14	3	By the mouth of a fool comes a rod for his back but the lips of the wise will preserve them	By the mouth of a fool comes a rod for his back, but the lips of the wise will preserve them.	mouth, fool, lips, wise
14	4	Where there are no oxen the manger is clean but abundant crops come by the strength of the ox	Where there are no oxen, the manger is clean, but abundant crops come by the strength of the ox.	abundant, crops, strength, ox
14	5	A faithful witness does not lie but a false witness breathes out lies	A faithful witness does not lie, but a false witness breathes out lies.	faithful witness, false witness, lie
14	6	A scoffer seeks wisdom in vain but knowledge is easy for a man of understanding	A scoffer seeks wisdom in vain, but knowledge is easy for a man of understanding.	scoffers, wisdom, knowledge, understanding
14	7	Leave the presence of a fool for there you do not meet words of knowledge	Leave the presence of a fool, for there you do not meet words of knowledge.	fool, words of knowledge
14	8	The wisdom of the prudent is to discern his way but the folly of fools is deceiving	The wisdom of the prudent is to discern his way, but the folly of fools is deceiving.	prudent, folly of fools, deceiving
14	9	Fools mock at the guilt offering but the upright enjoy acceptance	Fools mock at the guilt offering, but the upright enjoy acceptance.	mock, guilt offering, upright, acceptance
14	10	The heart knows its own bitterness and no stranger shares its joy	The heart knows its own bitterness, and no stranger shares its joy.	heart, bitterness, stranger, joy
14	11	The house of the wicked will be destroyed but the tent of the upright will flourish	The house of the wicked will be destroyed, but the tent of the upright will flourish.	house of wicked, destroyed, tent of upright, flourish
14	12	There is a way that seems right to a man but its end is the way to death	There is a way that seems right to a man, but its end is the way to death.	way, end, death
14	13	Even in laughter the heart may ache and the end of joy may be grief	Even in laughter the heart may ache, and the end of joy may be grief.	laughter, heart, ache, end of joy, grief
14	14	The backslider in heart will be filled with the fruit of his ways and a good man will be filled with the fruit of his ways	The backslider in heart will be filled with the fruit of his ways, and a good man will be filled with the fruit of his ways.	backslider, filled, fruit, good man
14	15	The simple believes everything but the prudent gives thought to his steps	The simple believes everything, but the prudent gives thought to his steps.	simple, believes, prudent, steps
14	16	One who is wise is cautious and turns away from evil but a fool is reckless and careless	One who is wise is cautious and turns away from evil, but a fool is reckless and careless.	wise, cautious, fool, reckless, careless
14	17	A man of quick temper acts foolishly and a man of evil devices is hated	A man of quick temper acts foolishly, and a man of evil devices is hated.	man, quick temper, foolishly, evil, hated
14	18	The simple inherit folly but the prudent are crowned with knowledge	The simple inherit folly, but the prudent are crowned with knowledge.	inherit folly, prudent, crowned with knowledge
14	19	The evil bow down before the good the wicked at the gates of the righteous	The evil bow down before the good, the wicked at the gates of the righteous.	evil, good, wicked, gates of the righteous
14	20	The poor is disliked even by his neighbor but the rich has many friends	The poor is disliked even by his neighbor, but the rich has many friends.	poor, neighbor, rich, friends
14	21	Whoever despises his neighbor is a sinner but blessed is he who is generous to the poor	Whoever despises his neighbor is a sinner, but blessed is he who is generous to the poor.	despises, neighbor, sinner, blessed, generous, poor
14	22	Do they not go astray who devise evil Those who devise good meet steadfast love and faithfulness	Do they not go astray who devise evil? Those who devise good meet steadfast love and faithfulness.	astray, devise, good, steadfast love, faithfulness
14	23	In all toil there is profit but mere talk tends only to poverty	In all toil there is profit, but mere talk tends only to poverty.	toil, profit, poverty
14	24	The crown of the wise is their wealth but the folly of fools brings folly	The crown of the wise is their wealth, but the folly of fools brings folly.	crown, wise, wealth, folly, fools
14	25	A truthful witness saves lives but one who breathes out lies is deceitful	A truthful witness saves lives, but one who breathes out lies is deceitful.	truthful witness, saves, lies, deceitful
14	26	In the fear of the Lord one has strong confidence and his children will have a refuge	In the fear of the Lord one has strong confidence, and his children will have a refuge.	fear, Lord, strong confidence, children, refuge
14	27	The fear of the Lord is a fountain of life that one may turn away from the snares of death	The fear of the Lord is a fountain of life, that one may turn away from the snares of death.	fear, Lord, fountain of life, snares of death
14	28	In a multitude of people is the glory of a king but without people a prince is ruined	In a multitude of people is the glory of a king, but without people a prince is ruined.	multitude, glory, king, people, ruined, prince
14	29	Whoever is slow to anger has great understanding but he who has a hasty temper exalts folly	Whoever is slow to anger has great understanding, but he who has a hasty temper exalts folly.	slow, anger, great understanding, hasty temper
14	30	A tranquil heart gives life to the flesh but envy makes the bones rot	A tranquil heart gives life to the flesh, but envy makes the bones rot.	tranquil heart, life, flesh, envy, bones, rot
14	31	Whoever oppresses a poor man insults his Maker but he who is generous to the needy honors him	Whoever oppresses a poor man insults his Maker, but he who is generous to the needy honors him.	oppresses, poor, insults, Maker, generous, needy
14	32	The wicked is overthrown through his evildoing but the righteous finds refuge in his death	The wicked is overthrown through his evildoing, but the righteous finds refuge in his death.	wicked, evildoing, righteous, refuge, death
14	33	Wisdom rests in the heart of a man of understanding but it makes itself known even in the midst of fools	Wisdom rests in the heart of a man of understanding, but it makes itself known even in the midst of fools.	wisdom, heart, understanding, midst of fools
14	34	Righteousness exalts a nation but sin is a reproach to any people	Righteousness exalts a nation, but sin is a reproach to any people.	righteousness, nation, sin, people
14	35	A servant who deals wisely has the kings favor but his wrath falls on one who acts shamefully	A servant who deals wisely has the king’s favor, but his wrath falls on one who acts shamefully.	servant, wisely, favor, wrath, shamefully
15	1	A soft answer turns away wrath but a harsh word stirs up anger	A soft answer turns away wrath, but a harsh word stirs up anger.	answer, wrath, harsh, anger
15	2	The tongue of the wise commends knowledge but the mouths of fools pour out folly	The tongue of the wise commends knowledge, but the mouths of fools pour out folly.	wise, knowledge, fools
15	3	The eyes of the Lord are in every place keeping watch on the evil and the good	The eyes of the Lord are in every place, keeping watch on the evil and the good.	eyes, Lord, watch, evil, good
15	4	A gentle tongue is a tree of life but perverseness in it breaks the spirit	A gentle tongue is a tree of life, but perverseness in it breaks the spirit.	life, perverseness, spirit
15	5	A fool despises his fathers instruction but whoever heeds reproof is prudent	A fool despises his father’s instruction, but whoever heeds reproof is prudent.	instruction, reproof,
15	6	In the house of the righteous there is much treasure but trouble befalls the income of the wicked	In the house of the righteous there is much treasure, but trouble befalls the income of the wicked.	righteous, treasure, trouble
15	7	The lips of the wise spread knowledge not so the hearts of fools	The lips of the wise spread knowledge; not so the hearts of fools.	wise, knowledge, hearts
15	8	The sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination to the Lord but the prayer of the upright is acceptable to him	The sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination to the Lord, but the prayer of the upright is acceptable to him.	sacrifice, abomination, Lord, prayer
15	9	The way of the wicked is an abomination to the Lord but he loves him who pursues righteousness	The way of the wicked is an abomination to the Lord, but he loves him who pursues righteousness.	loves, pursues, righteousness
15	10	There is severe discipline for him who forsakes the way whoever hates reproof will die	There is severe discipline for him who forsakes the way; whoever hates reproof will die.	discipline, forsakes, hates, die
15	11	Sheol and Abaddon lie open before the Lord how much more the hearts of the children of man	Sheol and Abaddon lie open before the Lord; how much more the hearts of the children of man!	Sheol, Abaddon, lie, Lord, children
15	12	A scoffer does not like to be reproved he will not go to the wise	A scoffer does not like to be reproved; he will not go to the wise.	scoffer, reproved, wise
15	13	A glad heart makes a cheerful face but by sorrow of heart the spirit is crushed	A glad heart makes a cheerful face, but by sorrow of heart the spirit is crushed.	cheerful, sorrow, spirit, crushed
15	14	The heart of him who has understanding seeks knowledge but the mouths of fools feed on folly	The heart of him who has understanding seeks knowledge, but the mouths of fools feed on folly.	understanding, knowledge, feed
15	15	All the days of the afflicted are evil but the cheerful of heart has a continual feast	All the days of the afflicted are evil, but the cheerful of heart has a continual feast.	days, afflicted, evil, feast
15	16	Better is a little with the fear of the Lord than great treasure and trouble with it	Better is a little with the fear of the Lord than great treasure and trouble with it.	little, fear, Lord, treasure, trouble
15	17	Better is a dinner of herbs where love is than a fattened ox and hatred with it	Better is a dinner of herbs where love is than a fattened ox and hatred with it.	dinner, herbs, love, ox, hatred
15	18	A hot-tempered man stirs up strife	A hot-tempered man stirs up strife,	anger, conflict resolution
15	19	The way of a sluggard is like a hedge of thorns	The way of a sluggard is like a hedge of thorns,	laziness, diligence, upright path
15	20	A wise son makes a glad father	A wise son makes a glad father,	wisdom, filial joy, foolishness
15	21	Folly is a joy to him who lacks sense	Folly is a joy to him who lacks sense,	folly, lack of sense, understanding
15	22	Without counsel plans fail	 Without counsel plans fail,	wisdom, counsel, success
15	23	To make an apt answer is a joy to a man	To make an apt answer is a joy to a man,	effective communication, joy
15	24	The path of life leads upward for the prudent	The path of life leads upward for the prudent,	prudence, life's direction
15	25	The Lord tears down the house of the proud but maintains the widows boundaries	The Lord tears down the house of the proud but maintains the widow’s boundaries,	humility, divine justice
15	26	The thoughts of the wicked are an abomination to the Lord	The thoughts of the wicked are an abomination to the Lord,	wicked thoughts, pure speech
15	27	Whoever is greedy for unjust gain troubles his own household	Whoever is greedy for unjust gain troubles his own household,	greed, justice, family welfare
15	28	The heart of the righteous ponders how to answer	The heart of the righteous ponders how to answer,	righteous heart, thoughtful response
15	29	The Lord is far from the wicked	The Lord is far from the wicked,	divine presence, righteousness
15	30	The light of the eyes rejoices the heart	The light of the eyes rejoices the heart,	joy, positive outlook, good news
15	31	The ear that listens to life-giving reproof will dwell among the wise	The ear that listens to life-giving reproof will dwell among the wise,	receptivity, wisdom, correction
15	32	Whoever ignores instruction despises himself	Whoever ignores instruction despises himself,	instruction, self-disdain, wisdom
15	33	The fear of the Lord is instruction in wisdom and humility comes before honor	The fear of the Lord is instruction in wisdom, and humility comes before honor.	fear of the Lord, wisdom, humility