Chapter	Verse	Unformatted Text (Pure Text Only)	Formatted Text (with Punctuations)	Metawords_Keywords
26	1	Like snow in summer or rain in harvest so honor is not fitting for a fool	Like snow in summer or rain in harvest, so honor is not fitting for a fool.	fool, honor, unfitting
26	2	Like a sparrow in its flitting like a swallow in its flying a curse that is causeless does not alight	Like a sparrow in its flitting, like a swallow in its flying, a curse that is causeless does not alight.	sparrow, swallow, causeless curse
26	3	A whip for the horse a bridle for the donkey and a rod for the back of fools	A whip for the horse, a bridle for the donkey, and a rod for the back of fools.	whip, bridle, rod, fools
26	4	Answer not a fool according to his folly lest you be like him yourself	Answer not a fool according to his folly, lest you be like him yourself.	not answering, folly, becoming like a fool
26	5	Answer a fool according to his folly lest he be wise in his own eyes	Answer a fool according to his folly, lest he be wise in his own eyes.	answering, folly, preventing self-deception
26	6	Whoever sends a message by the hand of a fool cuts off his own feet and drinks violence	Whoever sends a message by the hand of a fool cuts off his own feet and drinks violence.	message, fool, self-harm, violence
26	7	Like a lame mans legs which hang useless is a proverb in the mouth of fools	Like a lame man’s legs, which hang useless, is a proverb in the mouth of fools.	proverb, fools
26	8	Like one who binds the stone in the sling is one who gives honor to a fool	Like one who binds the stone in the sling is one who gives honor to a fool.	binding stone, giving honor, fool
26	9	Like a thorn that goes up into the hand of a drunkard is a proverb in the mouth of fools	Like a thorn that goes up into the hand of a drunkard is a proverb in the mouth of fools.	thorn, hand of drunkard, proverb, fools
26	10	Like an archer who wounds everyone is one who hires a passing fool or drunkard	Like an archer who wounds everyone is one who hires a passing fool or drunkard.	archer, hiring fool, drunkard
26	11	Like a dog that returns to his vomit is a fool who repeats his folly	Like a dog that returns to his vomit is a fool who repeats his folly.	dog, returning to vomit, repeating folly
26	12	Do you see a man who is wise in his own eyes There is more hope for a fool than for him	Do you see a man who is wise in his own eyes? There is more hope for a fool than for him.	man, wise in own eyes, hope for fool
26	13	The sluggard says There is a lion in the road There is a lion in the streets	The sluggard says, “There is a lion in the road! There is a lion in the streets!”	sluggard, lion in the road, lion in the streets
26	14	As a door turns on its hinges so does a sluggard on his bed	As a door turns on its hinges, so does a sluggard on his bed.	door, sluggard, turning on hinges
26	15	The sluggard buries his hand in the dish it wears him out to bring it back to his mouth	The sluggard buries his hand in the dish; it wears him out to bring it back to his mouth.	sluggard, burying hand, weariness
26	16	The sluggard is wiser in his own eyes than seven men who can answer sensibly	The sluggard is wiser in his own eyes than seven men who can answer sensibly.	sluggard, wiser in own eyes, lack of sensibility
26	17	Whoever meddles in a quarrel not his own is like one who takes a passing dog by the ears	Whoever meddles in a quarrel not his own is like one who takes a passing dog by the ears.	meddling, quarrel, taking passing dog by ears
26	18	Like a madman who throws firebrands arrows and death	Like a madman who throws firebrands, arrows, and death	madman, throwing firebrands, arrows, death
26	19	is the man who deceives his neighbor and says I am only joking	is the man who deceives his neighbor and says, “I am only joking!”	deceiver, joking
26	20	For lack of wood the fire goes out and where there is no whisperer quarreling ceases	For lack of wood the fire goes out, and where there is no whisperer, quarreling ceases.	fire going out, lack of whisperer, ceasing quarreling
26	21	As charcoal to hot embers and wood to fire so is a quarrelsome man for kindling strife	As charcoal to hot embers and wood to fire, so is a quarrelsome man for kindling strife.	charcoal, embers, wood, fire, quarrelsome man, kindling strife
26	22	The words of a whisperer are like delicious morsels they go down into the inner parts of the body	The words of a whisperer are like delicious morsels; they go down into the inner parts of the body.	whisperer, delicious morsels, inner parts of the body
26	23	Like the glaze covering an earthen vessel are fervent lips with an evil heart	Like the glaze covering an earthen vessel are fervent lips with an evil heart.	glaze, earthen vessel, fervent lips, evil heart
26	24	Whoever hates disguises himself with his lips and harbors deceit in his heart	Whoever hates disguises himself with his lips and harbors deceit in his heart;	hating, disguises with lips, harboring deceit
26	25	when he speaks graciously believe him not for there are seven abominations in his heart	when he speaks graciously, believe him not, for there are seven abominations in his heart;	speaking graciously, not believing, seven abominations
26	26	though his hatred be covered with deception his wickedness will be exposed in the assembly	though his hatred be covered with deception, his wickedness will be exposed in the assembly.	hatred covered with deception, exposed wickedness, assembly
26	27	Whoever digs a pit will fall into it and a stone will come back on him who starts it rolling	Whoever digs a pit will fall into it, and a stone will come back on him who starts it rolling.	digging pit, falling into it, stone coming back
26	28	A lying tongue hates its victims and a flattering mouth works ruin	A lying tongue hates its victims, and a flattering mouth works ruin.	lying tongue, hating victims, flattering mouth, working ruin
27	1	Do not boast about tomorrow for you do not know what a day may bring	Do not boast about tomorrow, for you do not know what a day may bring.	Humility, Uncertainty
27	2	Let another praise you and not your own mouth a stranger and not your own lips	Let another praise you, and not your own mouth; a stranger, and not your own lips.	Humility, Praise, Recognition
27	3	A stone is heavy and sand is weighty but a fools provocation is heavier than both	A stone is heavy, and sand is weighty, but a fool’s provocation is heavier than both.	Foolishness, Provocation
27	4	Wrath is cruel anger is overwhelming but who can stand before jealousy	Wrath is cruel, anger is overwhelming, but who can stand before jealousy?	Emotions, Jealousy
27	5	Better is open rebuke than hidden love	Better is open rebuke than hidden love.	Communication, Honesty
27	6	Faithful are the wounds of a friend profuse are the kisses of an enemy	Faithful are the wounds of a friend; profuse are the kisses of an enemy.	Friendship, Loyalty, Betrayal
27	7	One who is full loathes honey but to one who is hungry everything bitter is sweet	One who is full loathes honey, but to one who is hungry everything bitter is sweet.	Contentment, Perspective
27	8	Like a bird that strays from its nest is a man who strays from his home	Like a bird that strays from its nest is a man who strays from his home.	Friendship, Counsel
27	9	Oil and perfume make the heart glad and the sweetness of a friend comes from his earnest counsel	Oil and perfume make the heart glad, and the sweetness of a friend comes from his earnest counsel.	Wisdom, Friendship, Counsel
27	10	Do not forsake your friend and your fathers friendand do not go to your brothers house in the day of your calamity Better is a neighbor who is near than a brother who is far away	Do not forsake your friend and your father’s friend,and do not go to your brother’s house in the day of your calamity. Better is a neighbor who is near than a brother who is far away.	Friendship, Wisdom, Support
27	11	Be wise my son and make my heart glad that I may answer him who reproaches me	Be wise, my son, and make my heart glad, that I may answer him who reproaches me.	Wisdom, Responsibility
27	12	The prudent sees danger and hides himselfbut the simple go on and suffer for it	The prudent sees danger and hides himself,but the simple go on and suffer for it.	Prudence, Danger, Caution
27	13	Take a mans garment when he has put up security for a stranger and hold it in pledge when he puts up security for an adulteress	Take a man’s garment when he has put up security for a stranger, and hold it in pledge when he puts up security for an adulteress.	Responsibility, Guarantees
27	14	Whoever blesses his neighbor with a loud voice rising early in the morning will be counted as cursing	Whoever blesses his neighbor with a loud voice, rising early in the morning, will be counted as cursing.	Communication, Timing
27	15	A continual dripping on a rainy day and a quarrelsome wife are alike	A continual dripping on a rainy day and a quarrelsome wife are alike;	Annoyances, Relationships
27	16	to restrain her is to restrain the wind or to grasp oil in ones right hand	to restrain her is to restrain the wind or to grasp oil in one’s right hand.	Conflict, Relationships
27	17	Iron sharpens iron and one man sharpens another	Iron sharpens iron, and one man sharpens another.	Mutual Improvement, Collaboration
27	18	Whoever tends a fig tree will eat its fruit and he who guards his master will be honored	Whoever tends a fig tree will eat its fruit, and he who guards his master will be honored.	Responsibility, Honor
27	19	As in water face reflects face so the heart of man reflects the man	As in water face reflects face, so the heart of man reflects the man.	Reflection, Character
27	20	Sheol and Abaddon are never satisfied and never satisfied are the eyes of man	Sheol and Abaddon are never satisfied, and never satisfied are the eyes of man.	Desires, Insatiability
27	21	The crucible is for silver and the furnace is for gold and a man is tested by his praise	The crucible is for silver, and the furnace is for gold, and a man is tested by his praise.	Testing, Praise, Character
27	22	Crush a fool in a mortar with a pestle along with crushed grain yet his folly will not depart from him	Crush a fool in a mortar with a pestle along with crushed grain, yet his folly will not depart from him.	Folly, Consequences
27	23	Know well the condition of your flocks and give attention to your herds	Know well the condition of your flocks, and give attention to your herds,	Responsibility, Attention
27	24	for riches do not last forever and does a crown endure to all generations	for riches do not last forever; and does a crown endure to all generations?	Impermanence, Wealth, Legacy
27	25	When the grass is gone and the new growth appears and the vegetation of the mountains is gathered	When the grass is gone and the new growth appears and the vegetation of the mountains is gathered,	Seasons, Provision, Sustainability
27	26	the lambs will provide your clothing and the goats the price of a field	the lambs will provide your clothing, and the goats the price of a field.	Provision, Sustainability, Contribution
27	27	There will be enough goats milk for your food for the food of your household and maintenance for your girls	There will be enough goats’ milk for your food, for the food of your household and maintenance for your girls.	Provision, Household Management, Sustainability
28	1	The wicked flee when no one pursues but the righteous are bold as a lion	The wicked flee when no one pursues, but the righteous are bold as a lion.	wickedness, righteousness, boldness, courage
28	2	When a land transgresses it has many rulers but with a man of understanding and knowledge its stability will long continue	When a land transgresses, it has many rulers, but with a man of understanding and knowledge, its stability will long continue.	transgression, rulership, understanding, knowledge, stability
28	3	A poor man who oppresses the poor is a beating rain that leaves no food	A poor man who oppresses the poor is a beating rain that leaves no food.	oppression, poverty, rain, famine
28	4	Those who forsake the law praise the wicked but those who keep the law strive against them	Those who forsake the law praise the wicked, but those who keep the law strive against them.	forsaking, law, praise, wickedness, opposition
28	5	Evil men do not understand justice but those who seek the Lord understand it completely	Evil men do not understand justice, but those who seek the Lord understand it completely.	evil, justice, seeking the Lord, understanding
28	6	Better is a poor man who walks in his integrity than a rich man who is crooked in his ways	Better is a poor man who walks in his integrity than a rich man who is crooked in his ways.	integrity, crookedness, understanding, exposure
28	7	The one who keeps the law is a son with understanding but a companion of gluttons shames his father	The one who keeps the law is a son with understanding, but a companion of gluttons shames his father.	law-keeping, understanding, companionship, shame
28	8	Whoever multiplies his wealth by interest and profit gathers it for him who is generous to the poor	Whoever multiplies his wealth by interest and profit gathers it for him who is generous to the poor.	wealth accumulation, generosity, poverty
28	9	If one turns away his ear from hearing the law even his prayer is an abomination	If one turns away his ear from hearing the law, even his prayer is an abomination.	neglecting the law, prayer, abomination
28	10	Whoever misleads the upright into an evil way will fall into his own pit but the blameless will have a goodly inheritance	Whoever misleads the upright into an evil way will fall into his own pit, but the blameless will have a goodly inheritance.	misleading, falling into a pit, blamelessness, inheritance
28	11	A rich man is wise in his own eyes but a poor man who has understanding will find him out	A rich man is wise in his own eyes, but a poor man who has understanding will find him out.	pride, self-deception, exposure
28	12	When the righteous triumph there is great glory but when the wicked rise people hide themselves	When the righteous triumph, there is great glory, but when the wicked rise, people hide themselves.	triumph, glory, rise, hiding
28	13	Whoever conceals his transgressions will not prosper but he who confesses and forsakes them will obtain mercy	Whoever conceals his transgressions will not prosper, but he who confesses and forsakes them will obtain mercy.	concealment, confession, mercy
28	14	Blessed is the one who fears the Lord always but whoever hardens his heart will fall into calamity	Blessed is the one who fears the Lord always, but whoever hardens his heart will fall into calamity	blessing, fear of the Lord, calamity
28	15	Like a roaring lion or a charging bear is a wicked ruler over a poor people	Like a roaring lion or a charging bear is a wicked ruler over a poor people.	wicked rulership, oppression, hiding
28	16	A ruler who lacks understanding is a cruel oppressor but he who hates unjust gain will prolong his days	A ruler who lacks understanding is a cruel oppressor, but he who hates unjust gain will prolong his days.	rulership, understanding, just gain, longevity
28	17	If one is burdened with the blood of another he will be a fugitive until death let no one help him	If one is burdened with the blood of another, he will be a fugitive until death; let no one help him.	guilt, fugitive, no help
28	18	Whoever walks in integrity will be delivered but he who is crooked in his ways will suddenly fall	Whoever walks in integrity will be delivered, but he who is crooked in his ways will suddenly fall.	integrity, deliverance, crookedness, downfall
28	19	Whoever works his land will have plenty of bread but he who follows worthless pursuits will have plenty of poverty	Whoever works his land will have plenty of bread, but he who follows worthless pursuits will have plenty of poverty.	hard work, abundance, worthless pursuits, poverty
28	20	A faithful man will abound with blessings but whoever hastens to be rich will not go unpunished	A faithful man will abound with blessings, but whoever hastens to be rich will not go unpunished.	faithfulness, blessings, hastiness, punishment
28	21	To show partiality is not good but for a piece of bread a man will do wrong	To show partiality is not good, but for a piece of bread a man will do wrong.	partiality, wrongdoing, bread
28	22	A stingy man hastens after wealth and does not know that poverty will come upon him	A stingy man hastens after wealth and does not know that poverty will come upon him.	greed, hastiness, ignorance, poverty
28	23	Whoever rebukes a man will afterward find more favor than he who flatters with his tongue	Whoever rebukes a man will afterward find more favor than he who flatters with his tongue.	rebuke, favor, flattery, tongue
28	24	Whoever robs his father or his mother and says That is no transgression is a companion to a man who destroys	Whoever robs his father or his mother and says, “That is no transgression,” is a companion to a man who destroys.	robbery, transgression, complicity, destruction
28	25	A greedy man stirs up strife but the one who trusts in the Lord will be enriched	A greedy man stirs up strife, but the one who trusts in the Lord will be enriched.	greed, strife, trust in the Lord, enrichment
28	26	Whoever trusts in his own mind is a fool but he who walks in wisdom will be delivered	Whoever trusts in his own mind is a fool, but he who walks in wisdom will be delivered.	foolishness, trust, wisdom, deliverance
28	27	Whoever gives to the poor will not want but he who hides his eyes will get many a curse	Whoever gives to the poor will not want, but he who hides his eyes will get many a curse.	generosity, lack, curse
28	28	When the wicked rise people hide themselves but when they perish the righteous increase	When the wicked rise, people hide themselves, but when they perish, the righteous increase.	wickedness, hiding, righteousness, increase
29	1	He who is often reproved yet stiffens his neck will suddenly be broken beyond healing	He who is often reproved, yet stiffens his neck, will suddenly be broken beyond healing.	reproval, stubbornness, brokenness, healing
29	2	When the righteous increase the people rejoice but when the wicked rule the people groan	When the righteous increase, the people rejoice, but when the wicked rule, the people groan.	righteousness, rejoicing, wickedness, groaning
29	3	He who loves wisdom makes his father glad but a companion of prostitutes squanders his wealth	He who loves wisdom makes his father glad, but a companion of prostitutes squanders his wealth.	wisdom, gladness, companionship, squandering
29	4	By justice a king builds up the land but he who exacts gifts tears it down	By justice, a king builds up the land, but he who exacts gifts tears it down.	justice, building, tearing down
29	5	A man who flatters his neighbor spreads a net for his feet	A man who flatters his neighbor spreads a net for his feet.	flattery, net, ensnarement
29	6	An evil man is ensnared in his transgression but a righteous man sings and rejoices	An evil man is ensnared in his transgression, but a righteous man sings and rejoices.	evil, transgression, righteousness, singing, rejoicing
29	7	A righteous man knows the rights of the poor a wicked man does not understand such knowledge	A righteous man knows the rights of the poor; a wicked man does not understand such knowledge.	righteousness, knowledge
29	8	Scoffers set a city aflame but the wise turn away wrath	Scoffers set a city aflame, but the wise turn away wrath.	scoffing, city aflame, turning away wrath
29	9	If a wise man has an argument with a fool the fool only rages and laughs and there is no quiet	If a wise man has an argument with a fool, the fool only rages and laughs, and there is no quiet.	wise man, argument, fool, rage, laughter, quiet
29	10	Bloodthirsty men hate one who is blameless and seek the life of the upright	Bloodthirsty men hate one who is blameless and seek the life of the upright.	bloodthirsty, blameless, seeking life, upright
29	11	A fool gives full vent to his spirit but a wise man quietly holds it back	A fool gives full vent to his spirit, but a wise man quietly holds it back.	foolishness, venting, wisdom, restraint
29	12	If a ruler listens to falsehood all his officials will be wicked	If a ruler listens to falsehood, all his officials will be wicked.	ruler, falsehood, wicked officials
29	13	The poor man and the oppressor meet together the Lord gives light to the eyes of both	The poor man and the oppressor meet together; the Lord gives light to the eyes of both.	poor, oppressor, meeting, light
29	14	If a king faithfully judges the poor his throne will be established forever	If a king faithfully judges the poor, his throne will be established forever.	king, judgment, poor, throne
29	15	The rod and reproof give wisdom but a child left to himself brings shame to his mother	The rod and reproof give wisdom, but a child left to himself brings shame to his mother.	rod, reproof, wisdom, discipline, shame
29	16	When the wicked increase transgression increases but the righteous will look upon their downfall	When the wicked increase, transgression increases, but the righteous will look upon their downfall.	wickedness, transgression, righteousness, downfall
29	17	Discipline your son and he will give you rest he will give delight to your heart	Discipline your son, and he will give you rest; he will give delight to your heart.	discipline, rest, delight
29	18	Where there is no prophetic vision the people cast off restraint but blessed is he who keeps the law	Where there is no prophetic vision, the people cast off restraint, but blessed is he who keeps the law.	prophetic vision, casting off restraint, blessedness, keeping the law
29	19	By mere words a servant is not disciplined for though he understands he will not respond	By mere words, a servant is not disciplined, for though he understands, he will not respond.	mere words, discipline, servant, understanding, no response
29	20	Do you see a man who is hasty in his words There is more hope for a fool than for him	Do you see a man who is hasty in his words? There is more hope for a fool than for him.	hasty words, hope, fool
29	21	Whoever pampers his servant from childhood will in the end find him his heir	Whoever pampers his servant from childhood will in the end find him his heir.	pampering, servant, childhood, heir
29	22	A man of wrath stirs up strife and one given to anger causes much transgression	A man of wrath stirs up strife, and one given to anger causes much transgression.	wrath, strife, anger, transgression
29	23	Ones pride will bring him low but he who is lowly in spirit will obtain honor	One’s pride will bring him low, but he who is lowly in spirit will obtain honor.	pride, lowliness, honor
29	24	The partner of a thief hates his own life he hears the curse but discloses nothing	The partner of a thief hates his own life; he hears the curse, but discloses nothing.	partner, thief, hatred, life, curse, disclosure
29	25	The fear of man lays a snare but whoever trusts in the Lord is safe	The fear of man lays a snare, but whoever trusts in the Lord is safe.	fear of man, snare, trust in the Lord, safety
29	26	Many seek the face of a ruler but it is from the Lord that a man gets justice	Many seek the face of a ruler, but it is from the Lord that a man gets justice.	seeking, ruler, justice
29	27	An unjust man is an abomination to the righteous but one whose way is straight is an abomination to the wicked	An unjust man is an abomination to the righteous, but one whose way is straight is an abomination to the wicked.	unjust, abomination, righteous, way, abomination, wicked
30	1	The words of Agur son of Jakeh The oracle The man declares I am weary O God I am weary O God and worn out	The words of Agur son of Jakeh. The oracle. The man declares, I am weary, O God; I am weary, O God, and worn out.	Agur, oracle, weary, God
30	2	Surely I am too stupid to be a man I have not the understanding of a man	Surely I am too stupid to be a man. I have not the understanding of a man.	stupid, understanding, man
30	3	I have not learned wisdom nor have I knowledge of the Holy One	I have not learned wisdom, nor have I knowledge of the Holy One.	wisdom, knowledge, Holy One
30	4	Who has ascended to heaven and come down Who has gathered the wind in his fists Who has wrapped up the waters in a garment Who has established all the ends of the earth What is his name and what is his sons nameSurely you know	Who has ascended to heaven and come down? Who has gathered the wind in his fists? Who has wrapped up the waters in a garment? Who has established all the ends of the earth? What is his name, and what is his son’s name? Surely you know!	ascended, heaven, wind, waters, earth, name, son’s name
30	5	Every word of God proves true he is a shield to those who take refuge in him	Every word of God proves true; he is a shield to those who take refuge in him.	Word of God, true, shield, refuge
30	6	Do not add to his words lest he rebuke you and you be found a liar	Do not add to his words, lest he rebuke you and you be found a liar.	add, words, rebuke, liar
30	7	Two things I ask of you deny them not to me before I die	Two things I ask of you; deny them not to me before I die:	two things, ask, deny, before I die
30	8	Remove far from me falsehood and lying give me neither poverty nor riches feed me with the food that is needful for me	Remove far from me falsehood and lying; give me neither poverty nor riches; feed me with the food that is needful for me,	remove, falsehood, lying, poverty, riches, needful
30	9	lest I be full and deny you and say Who is the Lord or lest I be poor and steal and profane the name of my God	lest I be full and deny you and say, “Who is the Lord?” or lest I be poor and steal and profane the name of my God.	full, deny, poor, steal, profane, God
30	10	Do not slander a servant to his master lest he curse you and you be held guilty	Do not slander a servant to his master, lest he curse you, and you be held guilty.	slander, servant, master, curse, guilty
30	11	There are those who curse their fathers and do not bless their mothers	There are those who curse their fathers and do not bless their mothers.	curse, fathers, bless, mothers
30	12	There are those who are clean in their own eyes but are not washed of their filth	There are those who are clean in their own eyes but are not washed of their filth.	clean, eyes, washed, filth
30	13	There are those-how lofty are their eyes how high their eyelids lift	There are those-how lofty are their eyes, how high their eyelids lift!	lofty, eyes, high, eyelids
30	14	There are those whose teeth are swords whose fangs are knives to devour the poor from off the earth the needy from among mankind	There are those whose teeth are swords, whose fangs are knives, to devour the poor from off the earth, the needy from among mankind.	teeth, swords, fangs, knives, devour, poor, needy
30	15	The leech has two daughters Give and Give Three things are never satisfied four never say Enough	The leech has two daughters: Give and Give. Three things are never satisfied; four never say, “Enough”: 	eech, daughters, give, enough, Sheol, barren womb, land, fire
30	16	Sheol the barren womb the land never satisfied with water and the fire that never says Enough	Sheol, the barren womb, the land never satisfied with water, and the fire that never says, “Enough.”	Sheol, barren womb, land, fire, enough
30	17	The eye that mocks a father and scorns to obey a mother will be picked out by the ravens of the valley and eaten by the vultures	The eye that mocks a father and scorns to obey a mother will be picked out by the ravens of the valley and eaten by the vultures.	eye, mocks, father, scorns, obey, mother, ravens, valley, vultures
30	18	Three things are too wonderful for me four I do not understand	Three things are too wonderful for me; four I do not understand:	wonderful, eagle, sky, serpent, rock, ship, high seas, man, virgin
30	19	the way of an eagle in the sky the way of a serpent on a rock the way of a ship on the high seas and the way of a man with a virgin	the way of an eagle in the sky, the way of a serpent on a rock, the way of a ship on the high seas, and the way of a man with a virgin.	eagle, sky, serpent, rock, ship, high seas, man, virgin
30	20	This is the way of an adulteress she eats and wipes her mouth and says I have done no wrong	This is the way of an adulteress: she eats and wipes her mouth and says, “I have done no wrong.”	adulteress, eats, wipes mouth, no wrong
30	21	Under three things the earth trembles under four it cannot bear up	Under three things the earth trembles; under four it cannot bear up:	earth, trembles, four, bear up
30	22	a slave when he becomes king and a fool when he is filled with food	a slave when he becomes king, and a fool when he is filled with food; 	slave, king, fool, filled with food
30	23	an unloved woman when she gets a husband and a maidservant when she displaces her mistress	an unloved woman when she gets a husband, and a maidservant when she displaces her mistress.	unloved woman, husband, maidservant, displaces mistress
30	24	Four things on earth are small but they are exceedingly wise	Four things on earth are small, but they are exceedingly wise:	four things, small, exceedingly wise
30	25	the ants are a people not strong yet they provide their food in the summer	the ants are a people not strong, yet they provide their food in the summer;	ants, people, not strong, provide, food, summer
30	26	the rock badgers are a people not mighty yet they make their homes in the cliffs	the rock badgers are a people not mighty, yet they make their homes in the cliffs;	rock badgers, people, not mighty, homes, cliffs
30	27	the locusts have no king yet all of them march in rank	the locusts have no king, yet all of them march in rank;	locusts, no king, march, rank
30	28	the lizard you can take in your hands yet it is in kings palaces	the lizard you can take in your hands, yet it is in kings’ palaces.	lizard, kings’ palaces
30	29	Three things are stately in their tread four are stately in their stride	Three things are stately in their tread; four are stately in their stride:	three things, stately, tread, four, stride
30	30	the lion which is mightiest among beasts and does not turn back before any	the lion, which is mightiest among beasts and does not turn back before any;	lion, mightiest, beasts, not turn back
30	31	the strutting rooster the he-goat and a king whose army is with him	the strutting rooster, the he-goat, and a king whose army is with him.	strutting rooster, he-goat, king, army
30	32	If you have been foolish exalting yourself or if you have been devising evil put your hand on your mouth	If you have been foolish, exalting yourself, or if you have been devising evil, put your hand on your mouth.	foolish, exalting, evil, hand on mouth
30	33	For pressing milk produces curds pressing the nose produces blood and pressing anger produces strife	For pressing milk produces curds, pressing the nose produces blood, and pressing anger produces strife.	pressing, milk, produces curds, nose, produces blood, anger, produces strife
31	1	The words of King Lemuel An oracle that his mother taught him	The words of King Lemuel. An oracle that his mother taught him:	King Lemuel, oracle
31	2	What are you doing my son What are you doing son of my womb What are you doing son of my vows	What are you doing, my son? What are you doing, son of my womb? What are you doing, son of my vows?	son, womb, vows
31	3	Do not give your strength to women your ways to those who destroy kings	Do not give your strength to women, your ways to those who destroy kings.	strength, women, destroy, kings
31	4	It is not for kings O Lemuel it is not for kings to drink wine or for rulers to take strong drink	It is not for kings, O Lemuel, it is not for kings to drink wine, or for rulers to take strong drink,	kings, Lemuel, wine, rulers, strong drink
31	5	lest they drink and forget what has been decreed and pervert the rights of all the afflicted	lest they drink and forget what has been decreed and pervert the rights of all the afflicted.	 drink, forget, decreed, pervert, rights, afflicted 
31	6	Give strong drink to the one who is perishing and wine to those in bitter distress	Give strong drink to the one who is perishing, and wine to those in bitter distress;	strong drink, perishing, wine, bitter distress
31	7	let them drink and forget their poverty and remember their misery no more	let them drink and forget their poverty and remember their misery no more.	drink, forget, poverty, remember, misery
31	8	Open your mouth for the mute for the rights of all who are destitute	Open your mouth for the mute, for the rights of all who are destitute.	open mouth, mute, rights, destitute
31	9	Open your mouth judge righteously defend the rights of the poor and needy	Open your mouth, judge righteously, defend the rights of the poor and needy.	 open mouth, judge, righteously, defend, rights, poor, needy
31	10	An excellent wife who can find She is far more precious than jewels	An excellent wife who can find? She is far more precious than jewels.	excellent wife, find, precious, jewels
31	11	The heart of her husband trusts in her and he will have no lack of gain	The heart of her husband trusts in her, and he will have no lack of gain.	eart, husband, trusts, no lack, gain
31	12	She does him good and not harm all the days of her life	She does him good, and not harm, all the days of her life.	good, harm, days, life
31	13	She seeks wool and flax and works with willing hands	She seeks wool and flax, and works with willing hands.	seeks, wool, flax, works, willing hands 
31	14	She is like the ships of the merchant she brings her food from afar	She is like the ships of the merchant; she brings her food from afar. 	ships, merchant, brings, food, afar
31	15	She rises while it is yet night and provides food for her household and portions for her maidens	She rises while it is yet night and provides food for her household and portions for her maidens.	rises, night, provides, food, household, portions, maidens
31	16	She considers a field and buys it with the fruit of her hands she plants a vineyard	She considers a field and buys it; with the fruit of her hands she plants a vineyard.	considers, field, buys, fruit, hands, plants, vineyard
31	17	She dresses herself with strength and makes her arms strong	She dresses herself with strength and makes her arms strong.	dresses, strength, makes, arms, strong
31	18	She perceives that her merchandise is profitable Her lamp does not go out at night	She perceives that her merchandise is profitable. Her lamp does not go out at night.	perceives, merchandise, profitable, lamp, night 
31	19	She puts her hands to the distaff and her hands hold the spindle	She puts her hands to the distaff, and her hands hold the spindle.	puts hands, distaff, holds, spindle
31	20	She opens her hand to the poor and reaches out her hands to the needy	She opens her hand to the poor and reaches out her hands to the needy.	opens hand, poor, reaches, hands, needy
31	21	She is not afraid of snow for her household for all her household are clothed in scarlet	She is not afraid of snow for her household, for all her household are clothed in scarlet.	not afraid, snow, household, clothed, scarlet 
31	22	She makes bed coverings for herself her clothing is fine linen and purple	She makes bed coverings for herself; her clothing is fine linen and purple.	makes, bed coverings, clothing, fine linen, purple
31	23	Her husband is known in the gates when he sits among the elders of the land	Her husband is known in the gates when he sits among the elders of the land.	husband, known, gates, sits, elders, land
31	24	She makes linen garments and sells them she delivers sashes to the merchant	She makes linen garments and sells them; she delivers sashes to the merchant.	makes, linen garments, sells, delivers, sashes, merchant 
31	25	Strength and dignity are her clothing and she laughs at the time to come	Strength and dignity are her clothing, and she laughs at the time to come. 	strength, dignity, clothing, laughs, time to come
31	26	She opens her mouth with wisdom and the teaching of kindness is on her tongue	She opens her mouth with wisdom, and the teaching of kindness is on her tongue.	opens mouth, wisdom, teaching, kindness, tongue
31	27	She looks well to the ways of her household and does not eat the bread of idleness	She looks well to the ways of her household and does not eat the bread of idleness.	looks well, ways, household, does not eat, bread, idleness
31	28	Her children rise up and call her blessed her husband also and he praises her	Her children rise up and call her blessed; her husband also, and he praises her:	children, rise up, call blessed, husband, praises
31	29	Many women have done excellently but you surpass them all	"Many women have done excellently, but you surpass them all."	women, done excellently, surpass
31	30	Charm is deceitful and beauty is vain but a woman who fears the Lord is to be praised	Charm is deceitful, and beauty is vain, but a woman who fears the Lord is to be praised.	charm, deceitful, beauty, vain, woman, fears, Lord, praised
31	31	Give her of the fruit of her hands and let her works praise her in the gates	Give her of the fruit of her hands, and let her works praise her in the gates.	give, fruit, hands, works, praise, gates