Chapter	Verse	Unformatted Text (Pure Text Only)	Formatted Text (with Punctuations)	Metawords_Keywords
1	1	The proverbs of Solomon son of David king of Israel	The proverbs of Solomon, son of David, king of Israel:	solomon, david, israel
1	2	To know wisdom and instruction to understand words of insight	To know wisdom and instruction, to understand words of insight,	wisdom, instruction, insight
1	3	to receive instruction in wise dealing in righteousness justice and equity	to receive instruction in wise dealing, in righteousness, justice, and equity;	wise dealing, righteousness, justice
1	4	to give prudence to the simple knowledge and discretion to the youth	to give prudence to the simple, knowledge and discretion to the youth—	prudence, knowledge, discretion
1	5	Let the wise hear and increase in learning and the one who understands obtain guidance	Let the wise hear and increase in learning, and the one who understands obtain guidance,	wise, learning, guidance
1	6	to understand a proverb and a saying the words of the wise and their riddles	to understand a proverb and a saying, the words of the wise and their riddles.	proverb, saying, riddles
1	7	The fear of the Lord is the beginning of knowledge fools despise wisdom and instruction	The fear of the Lord is the beginning of knowledge; fools despise wisdom and instruction.	fear, lord, knowledge
1	8	Hear my son your fathers instruction and forsake not your mothers teaching	Hear, my son, your father’s instruction, and forsake not your mother’s teaching,	hear, instruction, teaching
1	9	for they are a graceful garland for your head and pendants for your neck	for they are a graceful garland for your head and pendants for your neck.	garland, head, neck
1	10	My son if sinners entice you do not consent	My son, if sinners entice you, do not consent.	sinners, entice, consent
1	11	If they say Come with us let us lie in wait for blood let us ambush the innocent without reason	If they say, “Come with us, let us lie in wait for blood; let us ambush the innocent without reason;	ambush, innocent, blood
1	12	like Sheol let us swallow them alive and whole like those who go down to the pit	like Sheol let us swallow them alive, and whole, like those who go down to the pit;	sheol, swallow, alive
1	13	we shall find all precious goods we shall fill our houses with plunder	we shall find all precious goods, we shall fill our houses with plunder;	precious goods, houses, plunder
1	14	throw in your lot among us we will all have one purse	throw in your lot among us; we will all have one purse”—	lot, purse, walk
1	15	my son do not walk in the way with them hold back your foot from their paths	my son, do not walk in the way with them; hold back your foot from their paths,	walk, hold back, foot
1	16	for their feet run to evil and they make haste to shed blood	for their feet run to evil, and they make haste to shed blood.	feet, evil, shed blood
1	17	For in vain is a net spread in the sight of any bird	For in vain is a net spread in the sight of any bird,	net, spread, bird
1	18	but these men lie in wait for their own blood they set an ambush for their own lives	but these men lie in wait for their own blood; they set an ambush for their own lives.	ambush, blood, lives
1	19	Such are the ways of everyone who is greedy for unjust gain it takes away the life of its possessors	Such are the ways of everyone who is greedy for unjust gain; it takes away the life of its possessors.	greedy, unjust gain, life
1	20	Wisdom cries aloud in the street in the markets she raises her voice	Wisdom cries aloud in the street, in the markets she raises her voice;	wisdom, street, voice
1	21	at the head of the noisy streets she cries out at the entrance of the city gates she speaks	at the head of the noisy streets she cries out; at the entrance of the city gates she speaks:	noisy streets, cries out, city gates
1	22	How long O simple ones will you love being simple How long will scoffers delight in their scoffing and fools hate knowledge	“How long, O simple ones, will you love being simple? How long will scoffers delight in their scoffing and fools hate knowledge?	simple ones, scoffers, knowledge
1	23	If you turn at my reproof behold I will pour out my spirit to you I will make my words known to you	If you turn at my reproof, behold, I will pour out my spirit to you; I will make my words known to you.	turn, reproof, spirit
1	24	Because I have called and you refused to listen have stretched out my hand and no one has heeded	Because I have called and you refused to listen, have stretched out my hand and no one has heeded,	called, refused, listen
1	25	because you have ignored all my counsel and would have none of my reproof	because you have ignored all my counsel and would have none of my reproof,	ignored, counsel, reproof
1	26	I also will laugh at your calamity I will mock when terror strikes you	I also will laugh at your calamity; I will mock when terror strikes you,	laugh, calamity, mock
1	27	when terror strikes you like a storm and your calamity comes like a whirlwind when distress and anguish come upon you	when terror strikes you like a storm and your calamity comes like a whirlwind, when distress and anguish come upon you.	terror, storm, calamity
1	28	Then they will call upon me but I will not answer they will seek me diligently but will not find me	Then they will call upon me, but I will not answer; they will seek me diligently but will not find me.	call, answer, seek
1	29	Because they hated knowledge and did not choose the fear of the Lord	Because they hated knowledge and did not choose the fear of the Lord,	hated, knowledge, fear
1	30	would have none of my counsel and despised all my reproof	would have none of my counsel and despised all my reproof,	counsel, despised, reproof
1	31	therefore they shall eat the fruit of their way and have their fill of their own devices	therefore they shall eat the fruit of their way, and have their fill of their own devices.	eat, fruit, way
1	32	For the simple are killed by their turning away and the complacency of fools destroys them	For the simple are killed by their turning away, and the complacency of fools destroys them;	simple, turning away, complacency
1	33	but whoever listens to me will dwell secure and will be at ease without dread of disaster	but whoever listens to me will dwell secure and will be at ease, without dread of disaster.”	listen, dwell secure, ease
2	1	My son if you receive my words and treasure up my commandments with you	My son, if you receive my words and treasure up my commandments with you,	reception, treasure
2	2	making your ear attentive to wisdom and inclining your heart to understanding	making your ear attentive to wisdom and inclining your heart to understanding;	attentiveness, wisdom
2	3	yes if you call out for insight and raise your voice for understanding	yes, if you call out for insight and raise your voice for understanding,	call out, insight
2	4	if you seek it like silver and search for it as for hidden treasures	if you seek it like silver and search for it as for hidden treasures,	seek, silver
2	5	then you will understand the fear of the Lord and find the knowledge of God	then you will understand the fear of the Lord and find the knowledge of God.	understand, fear
2	6	For the Lord gives wisdom from his mouth come knowledge and understanding	For the Lord gives wisdom; from his mouth come knowledge and understanding;	Lord, wisdom
2	7	he stores up sound wisdom for the upright he is a shield to those who walk in integrity	he stores up sound wisdom for the upright; he is a shield to those who walk in integrity,	stores up, wisdom
2	8	guarding the paths of justice and watching over the way of his saints	guarding the paths of justice and watching over the way of his saints.	guarding, justice
2	9	Then you will understand righteousness and justice and equity every good path	Then you will understand righteousness and justice and equity, every good path;	understand, righteousness
2	10	for wisdom will come into your heart and knowledge will be pleasant to your soul	for wisdom will come into your heart, and knowledge will be pleasant to your soul;	wisdom, heart
2	11	discretion will watch over you understanding will guard you	discretion will watch over you, understanding will guard you,	discretion, understanding
2	12	delivering you from the way of evil from men of perverted speech	delivering you from the way of evil, from men of perverted speech,	delivering, evil
2	13	who forsake the paths of uprightness to walk in the ways of darkness	who forsake the paths of uprightness to walk in the ways of darkness,	forsake, uprightness
2	14	who rejoice in doing evil and delight in the perverseness of evil	who rejoice in doing evil and delight in the perverseness of evil,	rejoice, evil
2	15	men whose paths are crooked and who are devious in their ways	men whose paths are crooked, and who are devious in their ways.	crooked, devious
2	16	So you will be delivered from the forbidden woman from the adulteress with her smooth words	So you will be delivered from the forbidden woman, from the adulteress with her smooth words,	delivered, forbidden
2	17	who forsakes the companion of her youth and forgets the covenant of her God	who forsakes the companion of her youth and forgets the covenant of her God;	forsakes, companion
2	18	for her house sinks down to death and her paths to the departed	for her house sinks down to death, and her paths to the departed;	sinks, death
2	19	none who go to her come back nor do they regain the paths of life	none who go to her come back, nor do they regain the paths of life.	come back, life
2	20	So you will walk in the way of the good and keep to the paths of the righteous	So you will walk in the way of the good and keep to the paths of the righteous.	walk, righteous
2	21	For the upright will inhabit the land and those with integrity will remain in it	For the upright will inhabit the land, and those with integrity will remain in it,	upright, land
2	22	but the wicked will be cut off from the land and the treacherous will be rooted out of it	but the wicked will be cut off from the land, and the treacherous will be rooted out of it.	wicked, cut off
3	1	My son do not forget my teaching but let your heart keep my commandments	My son, do not forget my teaching, but let your heart keep my commandments,	forget, teaching, heart, keep, commandments
3	2	for length of days and years of life and peace they will add to you	for length of days and years of life and peace they will add to you.	life, peace
3	3	Let not steadfast love and faithfulness forsake you bind them around your neck write them on the tablet of your heart	Let not steadfast love and faithfulness forsake you; bind them around your neck; write them on the tablet of your heart.	steadfest, faithfulness, tablet, forsake
3	4	So you will find favor and good success in the sight of God and man	So you will find favor and good success in the sight of God and man.	favor, success, good
3	5	Trust in the Lord with all your heart and do not lean on your own understanding	Trust in the Lord with all your heart, and do not lean on your own understanding.	lean, understanding
3	6	In all your ways acknowledge him and he will make straight your paths	In all your ways acknowledge him, and he will make straight your paths.	acknowledge, paths
3	7	Be not wise in your own eyes fear the Lord and turn away from evil	Be not wise in your own eyes; fear the Lord, and turn away from evil.	fear, evil
3	8	It will be healing to your flesh and refreshment to your bones	It will be healing to your flesh and refreshment to your bones.	healing, refreshment
3	9	Honor the Lord with your wealth and with the firstfruits of all your produce	Honor the Lord with your wealth and with the firstfruits of all your produce;	wealth, firstfruits, produce
3	10	then your barns will be filled with plenty and your vats will be bursting with wine	then your barns will be filled with plenty, and your vats will be bursting with wine.	plenty, vats, bursting
3	11	My son do not despise the Lords discipline or be weary of his reproof	My son, do not despise the Lord’s discipline or be weary of his reproof,	despide, descipline, reproof, weary
3	12	for the Lord reproves him whom he loves as a father the son in whom he delights	for the Lord reproves him whom he loves, as a father the son in whom he delights.	reproves, loves, delights
3	13	Blessed is the one who finds wisdom and the one who gets understanding	Blessed is the one who finds wisdom, and the one who gets understanding,	blessed, wisdom, finds
3	14	for the gain from her is better than gain from silver and her profit better than gold	for the gain from her is better than gain from silver and her profit better than gold.	silver, gold, better
3	15	She is more precious than jewels and nothing you desire can compare with her	She is more precious than jewels, and nothing you desire can compare with her.	jewels, desire, precious
3	16	Long life is in her right hand in her left hand are riches and honor	Long life is in her right hand; in her left hand are riches and honor.	life, riches, honor
3	17	Her ways are ways of pleasantness and all her paths are peace	Her ways are ways of pleasantness, and all her paths are peace.	ways, pleasantness, paths, peace
3	18	She is a tree of life to those who lay hold of her those who hold her fast are called blessed	She is a tree of life to those who lay hold of her; those who hold her fast are called blessed.	hold, blessed, tree
3	19	The Lord by wisdom founded the earth by understanding he established the heavens	The Lord by wisdom founded the earth; by understanding he established the heavens;	Lord, wisdom, earth, established, heavens
3	20	by his knowledge the deeps broke open and the clouds drop down the dew	by his knowledge the deeps broke open, and the clouds drop down the dew.	knowledge, broke, open, clouds, drop, down,dew
3	21	My son do not lose sight of these keep sound wisdom and discretion	My son, do not lose sight of these— keep sound wisdom and discretion,	lose, sight, sound, wisdom, discretion
3	22	and they will be life for your soul and adornment for your neck	and they will be life for your soul and adornment for your neck.	life, soul, adornment
3	23	Then you will walk on your way securely and your foot will not stumble	Then you will walk on your way securely, and your foot will not stumble.	securely, stumble
3	24	If you lie down you will not be afraid when you lie down your sleep will be sweet	If you lie down, you will not be afraid; when you lie down, your sleep will be sweet.	lie, afraid, sweet
3	25	Do not be afraid of sudden terror or of the ruin of the wicked when it comes	Do not be afraid of sudden terror or of the ruin of the wicked, when it comes,	sudden, terror, ruin, wicked
3	26	for the Lord will be your confidence and will keep your foot from being caught	for the Lord will be your confidence and will keep your foot from being caught.	confidence, keep, caught
3	27	Do not withhold good from those to whom it is due when it is in your power to do it	Do not withhold good from those to whom it is due, when it is in your power to do it.	good, power
3	28	Do not say to your neighbor Go and come again tomorrow I will give itwhen you have it with you	Do not say to your neighbor, “Go, and come again, tomorrow I will give it”—when you have it with you.	neighbor, tomorrow, give
3	29	Do not plan evil against your neighbor who dwells trustingly beside you	Do not plan evil against your neighbor, who dwells trustingly beside you.	plan, evil, dwells, trustingly, beside
3	30	Do not contend with a man for no reason when he has done you no harm	Do not contend with a man for no reason, when he has done you no harm.	contend, man, reason, done, harm
3	31	Do not envy a man of violence and do not choose any of his ways	Do not envy a man of violence and do not choose any of his ways,	envy, violence, choose, ways
3	32	for the devious person is an abomination to the Lord but the upright are in his confidence	for the devious person is an abomination to the Lord, but the upright are in his confidence.	devious, person, abomination, upright, confidence
3	33	The Lords curse is on the house of the wicked but he blesses the dwelling of the righteous	The Lord’s curse is on the house of the wicked, but he blesses the dwelling of the righteous.	curse, house, wicked, blesses, dwelling, righteous
3	34	Toward the scorners he is scornful but to the humble he gives favor	Toward the scorners he is scornful, but to the humble he gives favor.	scorners, scornful, humble, gives, favor
3	35	The wise will inherit honor but fools get disgrace	The wise will inherit honor, but fools get disgrace.	wise, inherit, honor, fools, disgrace
4	1	Hear O sons a fathers instruction and be attentive that you may gain insight	Hear, O sons, a father’s instruction, and be attentive that you may gain insight	instruction, insight
4	2	for I give you good precepts do not forsake my teaching	for I give you good precepts; do not forsake my teaching.	precepts, teaching
4	3	When I was a son with my father tender the only one in the sight of my mother	When I was a son with my father, tender, the only one in the sight of my mother,	son, father
4	4	he taught me and said to me Let your heart hold fast my words keep my commandments and live	he taught me and said to me, 'Let your heart hold fast my words; keep my commandments, and live.	teach, live
4	5	Get wisdom get insight do not forget and do not turn away from the words of my mouth	Get wisdom; get insight; do not forget, and do not turn away from the words of my mouth	wisdom, insight
4	6	Do not forsake her and she will keep you love her and she will guard you	Do not forsake her, and she will keep you; love her, and she will guard you.	insight, guard
4	7	The beginning of wisdom is this Get wisdom and whatever you get get insight	The beginning of wisdom is this: Get wisdom, and whatever you get, get insight.	beginning, wisdom
4	8	Prize her highly and she will exalt you she will honor you if you embrace her	Prize her highly, and she will exalt you; she will honor you if you embrace her.	prize, embrace
4	9	She will place on your head a graceful garland she will bestow on you a beautiful crown	She will place on your head a graceful garland; she will bestow on you a beautiful crown.	garland, crown
4	10	Hear my son and accept my words that the years of your life may be many	Hear, my son, and accept my words, that the years of your life may be many	hear, accept
4	11	I have taught you the way of wisdom I have led you in the paths of uprightness	I have taught you the way of wisdom; I have led you in the paths of uprightness.	taught, uprightness
4	12	When you walk your step will not be hampered and if you run you will not stumble	When you walk, your step will not be hampered, and if you run, you will not stumble.	walk, stumble
4	13	Keep hold of instruction do not let go guard her for she is your life	Keep hold of instruction; do not let go; guard her, for she is your life.	hold, guard
4	14	Do not enter the path of the wicked and do not walk in the way of the evil	Do not enter the path of the wicked, and do not walk in the way of the evil.	path, evil
4	15	Avoid it do not go on it turn away from it and pass on	Avoid it; do not go on it; turn away from it and pass on.	avoid, turn away
4	16	For they cannot sleep unless they have done wrong they are robbed of sleep unless they have made someone stumble	For they cannot sleep unless they have done wrong; they are robbed of sleep unless they have made someone stumble.	sleep, wrong
4	17	For they eat the bread of wickedness and drink the wine of violence	For they eat the bread of wickedness and drink the wine of violence.	wickedness, violence
4	18	But the path of the righteous is like the light of dawn which shines brighter and brighter until full day	But the path of the righteous is like the light of dawn, which shines brighter and brighter until full day.	righteous, light
4	19	The way of the wicked is like deep darkness they do not know over what they stumble	The way of the wicked is like deep darkness; they do not know over what they stumble.	darkness, stumble
4	20	My son be attentive to my words incline your ear to my sayings	My son, be attentive to my words; incline your ear to my sayings.	attentive, words
4	21	Let them not escape from your sight keep them within your heart	Let them not escape from your sight; keep them within your heart.	heart, sight
4	22	For they are life to those who find them and healing to all their flesh	For they are life to those who find them, and healing to all their flesh.	life, healing
4	23	Keep your heart with all vigilance for from it flow the springs of life	Keep your heart with all vigilance, for from it flow the springs of life.	vigilance, heart
4	24	Put away from you crooked speech and put devious talk far from you	Put away from you crooked speech, and put devious talk far from you.	speech, talk
4	25	Let your eyes look directly forward and your gaze be straight before you	Let your eyes look directly forward, and your gaze be straight before you.	eyes, forward
4	26	Ponder the path of your feet then all your ways will be sure	Ponder the path of your feet; then all your ways will be sure.	ponder, sure
4	27	Do not swerve to the right or to the left turn your foot away from evil	Do not swerve to the right or to the left; turn your foot away from evil.	swerve, evil
5	1	My son be attentive to my wisdom incline your ear to my understanding	My son, be attentive to my wisdom; incline your ear to my understanding	son, attentive, wisdom, ear, understanding
5	2	that you may keep discretion and your lips may guard knowledge	that you may keep discretion, and your lips may guard knowledge.	discretion, lips, guard, knowledge
5	3	For the lips of a forbidden woman drip honey and her speech is smoother than oil	For the lips of a forbidden woman drip honey, and her speech is smoother than oil	lips, forbidden woman, honey, speech, smoother, oil
5	4	but in the end she is bitter as wormwood sharp as a two-edged sword	but in the end she is bitter as wormwood, sharp as a two-edged sword.	bitter, wormwood, sharp, two-edged sword
5	5	Her feet go down to death her steps follow the path to Sheol	Her feet go down to death; her steps follow the path to Sheol;	feet, death, steps, path, Sheol
5	6	she does not ponder the path of life her ways wander and she does not know it	she does not ponder the path of life; her ways wander, and she does not know it.	ponder, path, life, ways, wander
5	7	And now O sons listen to me and do not depart from the words of my mouth	And now, O sons, listen to me, and do not depart from the words of my mouth.	sons, listen, depart, words, mouth
5	8	Keep your way far from her and do not go near the door of her house	Keep your way far from her, and do not go near the door of her house	way, far, her, near, door, house
5	9	lest you give your honor to others and your years to the merciless	lest you give your honor to others and your years to the merciless	give, honor, others, years, merciless
5	10	let strangers take their fill of your strength and your labors go to the house of a foreigner	let strangers take their fill of your strength, and your labors go to the house of a foreigner	strangers, take, fill, strength, labors, house, foreigner
5	11	and at the end of your life you groan when your flesh and body are consumed	and at the end of your life you groan, when your flesh and body are consumed	end, life, groan, flesh, body, consumed
5	12	and you say How I hated discipline and my heart despised reproof	and you say, “How I hated discipline, and my heart despised reproof!”	say, hated, discipline, heart, despised, reproof
5	13	I did not listen to the voice of my teachers or incline my ear to my instructors	I did not listen to the voice of my teachers or incline my ear to my instructors.	listen, voice, teachers, incline, ear, instructors
5	14	I am at the brink of utter ruin in the assembled congregation	I am at the brink of utter ruin in the assembled congregation.	brink, utter ruin, assembled congregation
5	15	Drink water from your own cistern flowing water from your own well	Drink water from your own cistern, flowing water from your own well.	drink, water, cistern, flowing, well
5	16	Should your springs be scattered abroad streams of water in the streets	Should your springs be scattered abroad, streams of water in the streets?	springs, scattered, abroad, streams, water, streets
5	17	Let them be for yourself alone and not for strangers with you	Let them be for yourself alone, and not for strangers with you.	alone, strangers
5	18	Let your fountain be blessed and rejoice in the wife of your youth	Let your fountain be blessed, and rejoice in the wife of your youth,	fountain, blessed, rejoice, wife, youth
5	19	a lovely deer a graceful doe Let her breasts fill you at all times with delight be intoxicated always in her love	a lovely deer, a graceful doe. Let her breasts fill you at all times with delight; be intoxicated always in her love.	lovely deer, graceful doe, breasts, fill, delight, intoxicated, love
5	20	Why should you be intoxicated my son with a forbidden woman and embrace the bosom of an adulteress	Why should you be intoxicated, my son, with a forbidden woman and embrace the bosom of an adulteress?	intoxicated, son, forbidden woman, embrace, bosom, adulteress
5	21	For a mans ways are before the eyes of the Lord and he ponders all his paths	For a man’s ways are before the eyes of the Lord, and he ponders all his paths.	man’s ways, eyes, Lord, ponders, paths
5	22	The iniquities of the wicked ensnare him and he is held fast in the cords of his sin	The iniquities of the wicked ensnare him, and he is held fast in the cords of his sin.	iniquities, wicked, ensnare, held fast, cords, sin
5	23	He dies for lack of discipline and because of his great folly he is led astray	He dies for lack of discipline, and because of his great folly he is led astray.	dies, lack, discipline, great folly, led astray