Chapter	Verse	Unformatted Text (Pure Text Only)	Formatted Text (with Punctuations)	Metawords_Keywords
16	1	The plans of the heart belong to man but the answer of the tongue is from the Lord	The plans of the heart belong to man, but the answer of the tongue is from the Lord.	plans,heart, tongue,answer,Lord
16	2	All the ways of a man are pure in his own eyes but the Lord weighs the spirit	All the ways of a man are pure in his own eyes, but the Lord weighs the spirit.	ways, pure, eyes, Lord, weighs, spirit
16	3	Commit your work to the Lord and your plans will be established	Commit your work to the Lord, and your plans will be established.	commit, work, Lord, plans, established
16	4	The Lord has made everything for its purpose even the wicked for the day of trouble	The Lord has made everything for its purpose, even the wicked for the day of trouble.	Lord, made, everything, purpose, wicked, day of trouble
16	5	Everyone who is arrogant in heart is an abomination to the Lord be assured he will not go unpunished	Everyone who is arrogant in heart is an abomination to the Lord; be assured, he will not go unpunished.	arrogant, heart, abomination, Lord, assured, not go unpunished
16	6	By steadfast love and faithfulness iniquity is atoned for and by the fear of the Lord one turns away from evil	By steadfast love and faithfulness iniquity is atoned for, and by the fear of the Lord one turns away from evil.	steadfast love, faithfulness, iniquity, atoned for, fear of the Lord, turns away from evil
16	7	When a mans ways please the Lord he makes even his enemies to be at peace with him	When a man's ways please the Lord, he makes even his enemies to be at peace with him.	ways, please, Lord, enemies, peace
16	8	Better is a little with righteousness than great revenues with injustice	Better is a little with righteousness, than great revenues with injustice.	better, little, righteousness, great revenues, injustice
16	9	The heart of man plans his way but the Lord establishes his steps	The heart of man plans his way, but the Lord establishes his steps.	heart, plans, way, Lord, establishes, steps
16	10	An oracle is on the lips of a king his mouth does not sin in judgment	An oracle is on the lips of a king; his mouth does not sin in judgment.	oracle, lips, king, mouth, sin, judgment
16	11	A just balance and scales are the Lords all the weights in the bag are his work	A just balance and scales are the Lord's; all the weights in the bag are his work.	just balance, scales, Lord, weights, bag, work
16	12	It is an abomination to kings to do evil for the throne is established by righteousness	It is an abomination to kings, to do evil, for the throne is established by righteousness.	abomination, kings, evil, throne, established, righteousness
16	13	Righteous lips are the delight of a king and he loves him who speaks what is right	Righteous lips are the delight of a king, and he loves him who speaks what is right.	righteous lips, delight, king, loves, speaks, what is right
16	14	A kings wrath is a messenger of death and a wise man will appease it	A king's wrath is a messenger of death, and a wise man will appease it.	king's wrath, messenger, death, wise man, appease
16	15	In the light of a kings face there is life and his favor is like the clouds that bring the spring rain	In the light of a king's face there is life, and his favor is like the clouds that bring the spring rain.	light, king's face, life, favor, clouds, spring rain
16	16	How much better to get wisdom than gold To get understanding is to be chosen rather than silver	How much better to get wisdom than gold! To get understanding is to be chosen rather than silver.	better, wisdom, gold, understanding, chosen, silver
16	17	The highway of the upright is to depart from evil whoever guards his way preserves his life	The highway of the upright is to depart from evil; whoever guards his way preserves his life.	highway, upright, depart from evil, guards, way, preserves, life
16	18	Pride goes before destruction and a haughty spirit before a fall	Pride goes before destruction and a haughty spirit before a fall.	pride, destruction, haughty spirit, fall
16	19	It is better to be of a lowly spirit with the poor than to divide the spoil with the proud	It is better to be of a lowly spirit with the poor than to divide the spoil with the proud.	better, lowly spirit, poor, divide, spoil, proud
16	20	Whoever gives thought to the word will discover good and blessed is he who trusts in the Lord	Whoever gives thought to the word will discover good, and blessed is he who trusts in the Lord.	gives thought, word, discover, good, blessed, trusts, Lord
16	21	The wise of heart is called discerning and sweetness of speech increases persuasiveness	The wise of heart is called discerning, and sweetness of speech increases persuasiveness.	wise of heart, discerning, sweetness of speech, increases persuasiveness
16	22	Good sense is a fountain of life to him who has it but the instruction of fools is folly	Good sense is a fountain of life to him who has it, but the instruction of fools is folly.	good sense, fountain of life, instruction, fools, folly
16	23	The heart of the wise makes his speech judicious and adds persuasiveness to his lips	The heart of the wise makes his speech judicious and adds persuasiveness to his lips.	heart of the wise, speech, judicious, adds persuasiveness, lips
16	24	Gracious words are like a honeycomb sweetness to the soul and health to the body	Gracious words are like a honeycomb, sweetness to the soul and health to the body.	gracious words, honeycomb, sweetness, soul, health, body
16	25	There is a way that seems right to a man but its end is the way to death	There is a way that seems right to a man, but its end is the way to death.	way, seems right, man, end, way to death
16	26	A workers appetite works for him his mouth urges him on	 A worker's appetite works for him; his mouth urges him on.	worker's appetite, work, mouth, urges
16	27	A worthless man plots evil and his speech is like a scorching fire	A worthless man plots evil, and his speech is like a scorching fire.	worthless man, plots, evil, speech, scorching fire
16	28	A dishonest man spreads strife and a whisperer separates close friends	A dishonest man spreads strife, and a whisperer separates close friends.	dishonest man, spreads, strife, whisperer, separates, close friends
16	29	A man of violence entices his neighbor and leads him in a way that is not good	A man of violence entices his neighbor and leads him in a way that is not good.	man of violence, entices, neighbor, leads, way, not good
16	30	Whoever winks his eyes plans dishonest things he who purses his lips brings evil to pass	Whoever winks his eyes plans dishonest things; he who purses his lips brings evil to pass.	winks, eyes, plans, dishonest things, purses, lips, brings evil to pass
16	31	Gray hair is a crown of glory it is gained in a righteous life	Gray hair is a crown of glory; it is gained in a righteous life.	gray hair, crown of glory, gained, righteous life
16	32	Whoever is slow to anger is better than the mighty and he who rules his spirit than he who takes a city	Whoever is slow to anger is better than the mighty, and he who rules his spirit than he who takes a city.	slow to anger, better than the mighty, rules, spirit, takes a city
16	33	The lot is cast into the lap but its every decision is from the Lord	The lot is cast into the lap, but its every decision is from the Lord.	lot, cast, lap, decision, Lord
17	1	Better is a dry morsel with quiet than a house full of feasting with strife	Better is a dry morsel with quiet than a house full of feasting with strife.	morsel, strife
17	2	A servant who deals wisely will rule over a son who acts shamefully and will share the inheritance as one of the brothers	A servant who deals wisely will rule over a son who acts shamefully and will share the inheritance as one of the brothers.	servant, inheritance
17	3	The crucible is for silver and the furnace is for gold and the Lord tests hearts	The crucible is for silver, and the furnace is for gold, and the Lord tests hearts.	crucible, furnace
17	4	An evildoer listens to wicked lips and a liar gives ear to a mischievous tongue	An evildoer listens to wicked lips, and a liar gives ear to a mischievous tongue.	evildoer, mischievous
17	5	Whoever mocks the poor insults his Maker he who is glad at calamity will not go unpunished	Whoever mocks the poor insults his Maker; he who is glad at calamity will not go unpunished.	Maker, calamity
17	6	Grandchildren are the crown of the aged and the glory of children is their fathers	Grandchildren are the crown of the aged, and the glory of children is their fathers.	crown, glory
17	7	Fine speech is not becoming to a fool still less is false speech to a prince	Fine speech is not becoming to a fool; still less is false speech to a prince.	fool, prince
17	8	A bribe is like a magic stone in the eyes of the one who gives it wherever he turns he prospers	A bribe is like a magic stone in the eyes of the one who gives it; wherever he turns he prospers.	bribe, prospers
17	9	Whoever covers an offense seeks love but he who repeats a matter separates close friends	Whoever covers an offense seeks love, but he who repeats a matter separates close friends.	offense, separates
17	10	A rebuke goes deeper into a man of understanding than a hundred blows into a fool	A rebuke goes deeper into a man of understanding than a hundred blows into a fool.	rebuke, blows
17	11	An evil man seeks only rebellion and a cruel messenger will be sent against him	An evil man seeks only rebellion, and a cruel messenger will be sent against him.	rebellion, cruel
17	12	Let a man meet a she bear robbed of her cubs rather than a fool in his folly	Let a man meet a she-bear robbed of her cubs rather than a fool in his folly.	she-bear, folly
17	13	If anyone returns evil for good evil will not depart from his house	If anyone returns evil for good, evil will not depart from his house.	returns, depart
17	14	The beginning of strife is like letting out water so quit before the quarrel breaks out	The beginning of strife is like letting out water, so quit before the quarrel breaks out.	beginning, quarrel
17	15	He who justifies the wicked and he who condemns the righteous are both alike an abomination to the Lord	He who justifies the wicked and he who condemns the righteous are both alike an abomination to the Lord.	wicked, abomination
17	16	Why should a fool have money in his hand to buy wisdom when he has no sense	Why should a fool have money in his hand to buy wisdom when he has no sense?	money, wisdom
17	17	A friend loves at all times and a brother is born for adversity	A friend loves at all times, and a brother is born for adversity.	loves, adversity
17	18	One who lacks sense gives a pledge and puts up security in the presence of his neighbor	One who lacks sense gives a pledge and puts up security in the presence of his neighbor.	pledge, security
17	19	Whoever loves transgression loves strife he who makes his door high seeks destruction	Whoever loves transgression loves strife; he who makes his door high seeks destruction.	transgression, destruction
17	20	A man of crooked heart does not discover good and one with a dishonest tongue falls into calamity	A man of crooked heart does not discover good, and one with a dishonest tongue falls into calamity.	crooked, tongue
17	21	He who sires a fool gets himself sorrow and the father of a fool has no joy	He who sires a fool gets himself sorrow, and the father of a fool has no joy.	sires, joy
17	22	A joyful heart is good medicine but a crushed spirit dries up the bones	A joyful heart is good medicine, but a crushed spirit dries up the bones.	medicine, spirit
17	23	The wicked accepts a bribe in secret to pervert the ways of justice	The wicked accepts a bribe in secret to pervert the ways of justice.	pervert, justice
17	24	The discerning sets his face toward wisdom but the eyes of a fool are on the ends of the earth	The discerning sets his face toward wisdom, but the eyes of a fool are on the ends of the earth.	discerning, eyes
17	25	A foolish son is a grief to his father and bitterness to her who bore him	A foolish son is a grief to his father and bitterness to her who bore him.	grief, bitterness
17	26	To impose a fine on a righteous man is not good nor to strike the noble for their uprightness	To impose a fine on a righteous man is not good, nor to strike the noble for their uprightness.	righteous, uprightness 
17	27	Whoever restrains his words has knowledge and he who has a cool spirit is a man of understanding	Whoever restrains his words has knowledge, and he who has a cool spirit is a man of understanding.	restrain, understanding
17	28	Even a fool who keeps silent is considered wise when he closes his lips he is deemed intelligent	Even a fool who keeps silent is considered wise; when he closes his lips, he is deemed intelligent.	silent, intelligent
18	1	Whoever isolates himself seeks his own desire he breaks out against all sound judgment	Whoever isolates himself seeks his own desire; he breaks out against all sound judgment.	desire, judgment
18	2	A fool takes no pleasure in understanding but only in expressing his opinion	A fool takes no pleasure in understanding, but only in expressing his opinion.	pleasure, understanding
18	3	When wickedness comes contempt comes also and with dishonor comes disgrace	When wickedness comes, contempt comes also, and with dishonor comes disgrace.	wickedness, dishonor
18	4	The words of a mans mouth are deep waters the fountain of wisdom is a bubbling brook	The words of a man’s mouth are deep waters; the fountain of wisdom is a bubbling brook.	wisdom, fountain
18	5	It is not good to be partial to the wicked or to deprive the righteous of justice	It is not good to be partial to the wicked or to deprive the righteous of justice.	wicked, justice
18	6	A fools lips walk into a fight and his mouth invites a beating	A fool’s lips walk into a fight, and his mouth invites a beating.	beating
18	7	A fools mouth is his ruin and his lips are a snare to his soul	A fool’s mouth is his ruin, and his lips are a snare to his soul.	snare, soul
18	8	The words of a whisperer are like delicious morsels they go down into the inner parts of the body	The words of a whisperer are like delicious morsels; they go down into the inner parts of the body.	morsels, body
18	9	Whoever is slack in his work is a brother to him who destroys	Whoever is slack in his work is a brother to him who destroys.	brother, destroy
18	10	The name of the Lord is a strong tower the righteous man runs into it and is safe	The name of the Lord is a strong tower; the righteous man runs into it and is safe.	tower, righteous
18	11	A rich mans wealth is his strong city and like a high wall in his imagination	A rich man’s wealth is his strong city, and like a high wall in his imagination.	wealth, imagination
18	12	Before destruction a mans heart is haughty but humility comes before honor	Before destruction a man’s heart is haughty, but humility comes before honor.	haughty, humility
18	13	If one gives an answer before he hears it is his folly and shame	If one gives an answer before he hears, it is his folly and shame.	shame, folly
18	14	A mans spirit will endure sickness but a crushed spirit who can bear	A man’s spirit will endure sickness, but a crushed spirit who can bear?	sickness, spirit
18	15	An intelligent heart acquires knowledge and the ear of the wise seeks knowledge	An intelligent heart acquires knowledge, and the ear of the wise seeks knowledge.	intellegent, knowledge
18	16	A mans gift makes room for him and brings him before the great	A man’s gift makes room for him and brings him before the great.	gift, great
18	17	The one who states his case first seems right until the other comes and examines him	The one who states his case first seems right, until the other comes and examines him.	right, examines
18	18	The lot puts an end to quarrels and decides between powerful contenders	The lot puts an end to quarrels and decides between powerful contenders.	quarrels, contenders
18	19	A brother offended is more unyielding than a strong city and quarreling is like the bars of a castle	A brother offended is more unyielding than a strong city, and quarreling is like the bars of a castle.	unyielding, quarreling
18	20	From the fruit of a mans mouth his stomach is satisfied he is satisfied by the yield of his lips	From the fruit of a man’s mouth his stomach is satisfied; he is satisfied by the yield of his lips.	stomach, satisfied
18	21	Death and life are in the power of the tongue and those who love it will eat its fruits	Death and life are in the power of the tongue, and those who love it will eat its fruits.	death, tounge
18	22	He who finds a wife finds a good thing and obtains favor from the Lord	He who finds a wife finds a good thing and obtains favor from the Lord.	wife, favor
18	23	The poor use entreaties but the rich answer roughly	The poor use entreaties, but the rich answer roughly.	poor, rich
18	24	A man of many companions may come to ruin but there is a friend who sticks closer than a brother	A man of many companions may come to ruin, but there is a friend who sticks closer than a brother.	ruin, friend
19	1	Better is a poor person who walks in his integrity than one who is crooked in speech and is a fool	Better is a poor person who walks in his integrity than one who is crooked in speech and is a fool.	poor, integrity
19	2	Desire without knowledge is not good and whoever makes haste with his feet misses his way	Desire without knowledge is not good, and whoever makes haste with his feet misses his way.	desire, knowledge, haste, feet
19	3	When a mans folly brings his way to ruin his heart rages against the Lord	When a man’s folly brings his way to ruin, his heart rages against the Lord.	folly, ruin, heart, rage, Lord
19	4	Wealth brings many new friends but a poor man is deserted by his friend	Wealth brings many new friends, but a poor man is deserted by his friend.	wealth, friends, poor, deserted, friend
19	5	A false witness will not go unpunished and he who breathes out lies will not escape	A false witness will not go unpunished, and he who breathes out lies will not escape.	false witness, punished, lies, escape
19	6	Many seek the favor of a generous man and everyone is a friend to a man who gives gifts	Many seek the favor of a generous man, and everyone is a friend to a man who gives gifts.	seek, favor, generous man, friend, gives gifts
19	7	All a poor mans brothers hate himhow much more do his friends go far from himHe pursues them with words but does not have them	All a poor man’s brothers hate him;how much more do his friends go far from him!He pursues them with words, but does not have them.	poor, brothers, hate, friends, far from, pursues, words
19	8	Whoever gets sense loves his own soulhe who keeps understanding will discover good	Whoever gets sense loves his own soul;he who keeps understanding will discover good.	sense, loves, soul, keeps understanding, discover, good
19	9	A false witness will not go unpunished and he who breathes out lies will perish	A false witness will not go unpunished, and he who breathes out lies will perish.	false witness, punished, lies, perish
19	10	It is not fitting for a fool to live in luxury much less for a slave to rule over princes	It is not fitting for a fool to live in luxury, much less for a slave to rule over princes.	fool, luxury, slave, rule, princes
19	11	Good sense makes one slow to anger and it is his glory to overlook an offense	Good sense makes one slow to anger, and it is his glory to overlook an offense.	good sense, slow to anger, glory, overlook, offense
19	12	A kings wrath is like the growling of a lion but his favor is like dew on the grass	A king’s wrath is like the growling of a lion, but his favor is like dew on the grass.	king's wrath, growling, lion, favor, dew, grass
19	13	A foolish son is ruin to his father and a wifes quarreling is a continual dripping of rain	A foolish son is ruin to his father, and a wife’s quarreling is a continual dripping of rain.	foolish son, ruin, father, wife's quarreling, continual dripping, rain
19	14	House and wealth are inherited from fathers but a prudent wife is from the Lord	House and wealth are inherited from fathers, but a prudent wife is from the Lord.	house, wealth, inherited, fathers, prudent wife, Lord
19	15	Slothfulness casts into a deep sleep and an idle person will suffer hunger	Slothfulness casts into a deep sleep, and an idle person will suffer hunger.	slothfulness, deep sleep, idle person, suffer hunger
19	16	Whoever keeps the commandment keeps his lifehe who despises his ways will die	Whoever keeps the commandment keeps his life;he who despises his ways will die.	keeps commandment, keeps life, despises ways, die
19	17	Whoever is generous to the poor lends to the Lord and he will repay him for his deed	Whoever is generous to the poor lends to the Lord, and he will repay him for his deed.	generous, poor, lends, Lord, repay, deed
19	18	Discipline your son for there is hopedo not set your heart on putting him to death	Discipline your son, for there is hope;do not set your heart on putting him to death.	discipline, son, hope, set heart, putting to death
19	19	A man of great wrath will pay the penalty for if you deliver him you will only have to do it again	A man of great wrath will pay the penalty, for if you deliver him, you will only have to do it again.	great wrath, pay penalty, deliver, again
19	20	Listen to advice and accept instruction that you may gain wisdom in the future	Listen to advice and accept instruction, that you may gain wisdom in the future.	listen, advice, accept, instruction, gain wisdom, future
19	21	Many are the plans in the mind of a man but it is the purpose of the Lord that will stand	Many are the plans in the mind of a man, but it is the purpose of the Lord that will stand.	many plans, mind of man, purpose of the Lord, stand
19	22	What is desired in a man is steadfast love and a poor man is better than a liar	What is desired in a man is steadfast love, and a poor man is better than a liar.	desired in man, steadfast love, poor man, better than, liar
19	23	The fear of the Lord leads to life and whoever has it rests satisfiedhe will not be visited by harm	The fear of the Lord leads to life, and whoever has it rests satisfied;he will not be visited by harm.	fear of the Lord, leads to life, has it, rests satisfied, not visited by harm
19	24	The sluggard buries his hand in the dish and will not even bring it back to his mouth	The sluggard buries his hand in the dish and will not even bring it back to his mouth.	sluggard, buries hand, dish, will not bring back to mouth
19	25	Strike a scoffer and the simple will learn prudence reprove a man of understanding and he will gain knowledge	Strike a scoffer, and the simple will learn prudence; reprove a man of understanding, and he will gain knowledge.	strike scoffer, simple will learn, reprove, man of understanding, gain knowledge
19	26	He who does violence to his father and chases away his mother is a son who brings shame and reproach	He who does violence to his father and chases away his mother is a son who brings shame and reproach.	violence to father, chases away mother, son, brings shame, reproach
19	27	Cease to hear instruction my son and you will stray from the words of knowledge	Cease to hear instruction, my son, and you will stray from the words of knowledge.	cease to hear instruction, son, stray from words of knowledge
19	28	A worthless witness mocks at justice and the mouth of the wicked devours iniquity	A worthless witness mocks at justice, and the mouth of the wicked devours iniquity.	worthless witness, mocks at justice, mouth of wicked, devours iniquity
19	29	Condemnation is ready for scoffers and beating for the backs of fools	Condemnation is ready for scoffers, and beating for the backs of fools.	condemnation, ready for scoffers, beating, backs of fools
20	1	Wine is a mocker strong drink a brawler and whoever is led astray by it is not wise	Wine is a mocker, strong drink a brawler, and whoever is led astray by it is not wise.	astray, brawler, drink, mocker, strong, whoever, wise
20	2	The terror of a king is like the growling of a lion whoever provokes him to anger forfeits his life	The terror of a king is like the growling of a lion; whoever provokes him to anger forfeits his life.	anger, forfeits, growling, king, life, lion, provokes, terror
20	3	It is an honor for a man to keep aloof from strife but every fool will be quarreling	It is an honor for a man to keep aloof from strife, but every fool will be quarreling.	aloof, every, fool, honor, keep, man, quarreling, strife
20	4	The sluggard does not plow in the autumn he will seek at harvest and have nothing	The sluggard does not plow in the autumn; he will seek at harvest and have nothing.	autumn, does, harvest, have, nothing, plow, seek, sluggard
20	5	The purpose in a mans heart is like deep water but a man of understanding will draw it out	The purpose in a man's heart is like deep water, but a man of understanding will draw it out.	deep, draw, heart, like, man's, out, purpose, understanding, water
20	6	Many a man proclaims his own steadfast love but a faithful man who can find	Many a man proclaims his own steadfast love, but a faithful man who can find?	faithful, find, love, man, many, proclaims, steadfast
20	7	The righteous who walks in his integrity blessed are his children after him	The righteous who walks in his integrity— blessed are his children after him!	after, blessed, children, him, integrity, righteous, walks, who
20	8	A king who sits on the throne of judgment winnows all evil with his eyes	A king who sits on the throne of judgment winnows all evil with his eyes.	evil, eyes, judgment, king, sits, throne, winnows
20	9	Who can say I have made my heart pure I am clean from my sin	Who can say, 'I have made my heart pure; I am clean from my sin'?	clean, from, have, heart, made, pure, say, sin
20	10	Unequal weights and unequal measures are both alike an abomination to the Lord	Unequal weights and unequal measures are both alike an abomination to the Lord.	abomination, alike, both, lord, measures, unequal, weights
20	11	Even a child makes himself known by his acts by whether his conduct is pure and upright	Even a child makes himself known by his acts, by whether his conduct is pure and upright.	acts, child, conduct, even, himself, known, makes, pure, upright, whether
20	12	The hearing ear and the seeing eye the Lord has made them both	The hearing ear and the seeing eye, the Lord has made them both.	both, ear, eye, hearing, lord, made, seeing, them
20	13	Love not sleep lest you come to poverty open your eyes and you will have plenty of bread	Love not sleep, lest you come to poverty; open your eyes, and you will have plenty of bread.	bread, come, eyes, have, lest, love, open, plenty, poverty, sleep
20	14	Bad bad says the buyer but when he goes away then he boasts	“Bad, bad,” says the buyer, but when he goes away, then he boasts.	away, bad, boasts, buyer, goes, says, then
20	15	There is gold and abundance of costly stones but the lips of knowledge are a precious jewel	There is gold and abundance of costly stones, but the lips of knowledge are a precious jewel.	abundance, costly, gold, jewel, knowledge, lips, precious, stones
20	16	Take a mans garment when he has put up security for a stranger and hold it in pledge when he puts up security for foreigners	Take a man's garment when he has put up security for a stranger, and hold it in pledge when he puts up security for foreigners.	foreigners, garment, hold, man's, pledge, puts, security, stranger, take
20	17	Bread gained by deceit is sweet to a man but afterward his mouth will be full of gravel	Bread gained by deceit is sweet to a man, but afterward his mouth will be full of gravel.	afterward, bread, deceit, full, gained, gravel, man, mouth, sweet
20	18	Plans are established by counsel by wise guidance wage war	Plans are established by counsel; by wise guidance wage war.	counsel, established, guidance, plans, wage, war, wise
20	19	Whoever goes about slandering reveals secrets therefore do not associate with a simple babbler	Whoever goes about slandering reveals secrets; therefore do not associate with a simple babbler.	about, associate, babbler, goes, reveals, secrets, simple, slandering, whoever
20	20	If one curses his father or his mother his lamp will be put out in utter darkness	If one curses his father or his mother, his lamp will be put out in utter darkness.	curses, darkness, father, lamp, mother, one, out, put, utter
20	21	An inheritance gained hastily in the beginning will not be blessed in the end	An inheritance gained hastily in the beginning will not be blessed in the end.	beginning, blessed, end, gained, hastily, inheritance
20	22	Do not say I will repay evil wait for the Lord and he will deliver you	Do not say, 'I will repay evil'; wait for the Lord, and he will deliver you.	deliver, evil, lord, repay, say, wait, will, you
20	23	Unequal weights are an abomination to the Lord and false scales are not good	Unequal weights are an abomination to the Lord, and false scales are not good.	abomination, false, good, lord, scales, unequal, weights
20	24	A mans steps are from the Lord how then can man understand his way	A man's steps are from the Lord; how then can man understand his way?	from, lord, man's, steps, then, understand, way
20	25	It is a snare to say rashly It is holy and to reflect only after making vows	It is a snare to say rashly, 'It is holy,' and to reflect only after making vows.	after, holy, making, only, rashly, reflect, snare, vows
20	26	A wise king winnows the wicked and drives the wheel over them	A wise king winnows the wicked and drives the wheel over them.	drives, king, over, them, wheel, wicked, winnows, wise
20	27	The spirit of man is the lamp of the Lord searching all his innermost parts	The spirit of man is the lamp of the Lord, searching all his innermost parts.	innermost, lamp, lord, man, parts, searching, spirit
20	28	Steadfast love and faithfulness preserve the king and by steadfast love his throne is upheld	Steadfast love and faithfulness preserve the king, and by steadfast love his throne is upheld.	faithfulness, king, love, preserve, steadfast, throne, upheld
20	29	The glory of young men is their strength but the splendor of old men is their gray hair	The glory of young men is their strength, but the splendor of old men is their gray hair.	glory, gray, hair, men, old, splendor, strength, their, young
20	30	Blows that wound cleanse away evil strokes make clean the innermost parts	Blows that wound cleanse away evil; strokes make clean the innermost parts.	away, blows, clean, cleanse, evil, innermost, make, parts, strokes, wound