Chapter	Verse	Unformatted Text (Pure Text Only)	Formatted Text (with Punctuations)	Metawords_Keywords
6	1	My son if you have put up security for your neighbor have given your pledge for a stranger	My son, if you have put up security for your neighbor, have given your pledge for a stranger,	son, security, pledge
6	2	if you are snared in the words of your mouth caught in the words of your mouth	if you are snared in the words of your mouth, caught in the words of your mouth,	snared, mouth
6	3	then do this my son and save yourself for you have come into the hand of your neighbor go hasten and plead urgently with your neighbor	then do this, my son, and save yourself, for you have come into the hand of your neighbor: go, hasten, and plead urgently with your neighbor.	son, neighbor, hasten
6	4	Give your eyes no sleep and your eyelids no slumber	Give your eyes no sleep and your eyelids no slumber;	eyes, slumber
6	5	save yourself like a gazelle from the hand of the hunter like a bird from the hand of the fowler	save yourself like a gazelle from the hand of the hunter, like a bird from the hand of the fowler.	gazelle, hunter, bird, fowler
6	6	Go to the ant O sluggard consider her ways and be wise	Go to the ant, O sluggard; consider her ways, and be wise.	sluggard, wise
6	7	Without having any chief officer or ruler	Without having any chief, officer, or ruler,	chief, officer, ruler
6	8	she prepares her bread in summer and gathers her food in harvest	she prepares her bread in summer and gathers her food in harvest.	bread, gathers, harvest
6	9	How long will you lie there O sluggard When will you arise from your sleep	How long will you lie there, O sluggard? When will you arise from your sleep?	lie, sluggard, sleep
6	10	A little sleep a little slumber a little folding of the hands to rest	A little sleep, a little slumber, a little folding of the hands to rest,	little, rest
6	11	and poverty will come upon you like a robber and want like an armed man	and poverty will come upon you like a robber, and want like an armed man.	poverty, robber, man
6	12	A worthless person a wicked man goes about with crooked speech	A worthless person, a wicked man, goes about with crooked speech,	worthless, wicked, speech, person
6	13	winks with his eyes signals with his feet points with his finger	winks with his eyes, signals with his feet, points with his finger,	signals, eyes, feet, finger
6	14	with perverted heart devises evil continually sowing discord	with perverted heart devises evil, continually sowing discord;	heart, evil, discord
6	15	therefore calamity will come upon him suddenly in a moment he will be broken beyond healing	therefore calamity will come upon him suddenly; in a moment he will be broken beyond healing.	broken, healing
6	16	There are six things that the Lord hates seven that are an abomination to him	There are six things that the Lord hates, seven that are an abomination to him:	lord, hates, abomination
6	17	haughty eyes a lying tongue and hands that shed innocent blood	haughty eyes, a lying tongue, and hands that shed innocent blood,	eyes, tongue, hands, blood
6	18	a heart that devises wicked plans feet that make haste to run to evil	a heart that devises wicked plans, feet that make haste to run to evil,	heart, plans, evil
6	19	a false witness who breathes out lies and one who sows discord among brothers	a false witness who breathes out lies, and one who sows discord among brothers.	lies, brothers, witness
6	20	My son keep your fathers commandment and forsake not your mothers teaching	My son, keep your father’s commandment, and forsake not your mother’s teaching.	son, father's, mother's, commandment, teaching
6	21	Bind them on your heart always tie them around your neck	Bind them on your heart always; tie them around your neck.	heart, tie, neck
6	22	When you walk they will lead you when you lie down they will watch over you and when you awake they will talk with you	When you walk, they will lead you; when you lie down, they will watch over you; and when you awake, they will talk with you.	walk, lead, watch, awake, talk
6	23	For the commandment is a lamp and the teaching a light and the reproofs of discipline are the way of life	For the commandment is a lamp and the teaching a light, and the reproofs of discipline are the way of life,	commandment, teaching, light, discipline, life
6	24	to preserve you from the evil woman from the smooth tongue of the adulteress	to preserve you from the evil woman, from the smooth tongue of the adulteress.	evil, woman, tongue, adulteress
6	25	Do not desire her beauty in your heart and do not let her capture you with her eyelashes	Do not desire her beauty in your heart, and do not let her capture you with her eyelashes;	desire, beauty, heart, capture
6	26	for the price of a prostitute is only a loaf of bread but a married woman hunts down a precious life	for the price of a prostitute is only a loaf of bread, but a married woman hunts down a precious life.	prostitute, price, bread, married, hunts, life
6	27	Can a man carry fire next to his chest and his clothes not be burned	Can a man carry fire next to his chest and his clothes not be burned?	man, fire, chest, clothes
6	28	Or can one walk on hot coals and his feet not be scorched	Or can one walk on hot coals and his feet not be scorched?	walk, feet, scorched
6	29	So is he who goes in to his neighbors wife none who touches her will go unpunished	So is he who goes in to his neighbor’s wife; none who touches her will go unpunished.	neighbor’s, wife, unpunished
6	30	People do not despise a thief if he steals to satisfy his appetite when he is hungry	People do not despise a thief if he steals to satisfy his appetite when he is hungry,	thief, steals, hungry
6	31	but if he is caught he will pay sevenfold he will give all the goods of his house	but if he is caught, he will pay sevenfold; he will give all the goods of his house.	pay, sevenfold, goods, house
6	32	but if he is caught he will pay sevenfold he will give all the goods of his house	but if he is caught, he will pay sevenfold; he will give all the goods of his house.	commits, adultery, himself
6	33	He will get wounds and dishonor and his disgrace will not be wiped away	He will get wounds and dishonor, and his disgrace will not be wiped away.	wounds, dishonor, disgrace
6	34	For jealousy makes a man furious and he will not spare when he takes revenge	For jealousy makes a man furious, and he will not spare when he takes revenge.	jealousy, man, furious, revenge
6	35	He will accept no compensation he will refuse though you multiply gifts	He will accept no compensation; he will refuse though you multiply gifts.	compensation, gifts
7	1	My son keep my words and treasure up my commandments with you	My son, keep my words and treasure up my commandments with you.	son, keep, commandments
7	2	Keep my commandments and live keep my teaching as the apple of your eye	Keep my commandments and live; keep my teaching as the apple of your eye.	live, teaching, eye
7	3	Bind them on your fingers write them on the tablet of your heart	Bind them on your fingers; write them on the tablet of your heart.	bind, write, heart
7	4	Say to wisdom You are my sister and call insight your intimate friend	Say to wisdom, 'You are my sister,' and call insight your intimate friend.	wisdom, sister, insight
7	5	To keep you from the forbidden woman from the adulteress with her smooth words	To keep you from the forbidden woman, from the adulteress with her smooth words.	forbidden, adulteress, words
7	6	For at the window of my house I have looked out through my lattice	For at the window of my house I have looked out through my lattice.	window, lattice, house
7	7	And I have seen among the simple I have perceived among the youths a young man lacking sense	And I have seen among the simple, I have perceived among the youths, a young man lacking sense.	simple, youths, sense
7	8	Passing along the street near her corner taking the road to her house	Passing along the street near her corner, taking the road to her house.	street, corner, house
7	9	In the twilight in the evening at the time of night and darkness	In the twilight, in the evening, at the time of night and darkness.	twilight, evening, darkness
7	10	And behold the woman meets him dressed as a prostitute wily of heart	And behold, the woman meets him, dressed as a prostitute, wily of heart.	woman, prostitute, heart
7	11	She is loud and wayward her feet do not stay at home	She is loud and wayward; her feet do not stay at home	loud, wayward, home
7	12	Now in the street now in the market and at every corner she lies in wait	Now in the street, now in the market, and at every corner she lies in wait.	street, market, corner
7	13	She seizes him and kisses him and with bold face she says to him	She seizes him and kisses him, and with bold face she says to him,	seizes, kisses, bold
7	14	I had to offer sacrifices and today I have paid my vows	I had to offer sacrifices, and today I have paid my vows;	sacrifices, vows, meet
7	15	So now I have come out to meet you to seek you eagerly and I have found you	So now I have come out to meet you, to seek you eagerly, and I have found you.	spread, linens, Egyptian
7	16	I have spread my couch with coverings colored linens from Egyptian linen	I have spread my couch with coverings, colored linens from Egyptian linen;	perfumed, bed, myrrh
7	17	I have perfumed my bed with myrrh aloes and cinnamon	I have perfumed my bed with myrrh, aloes, and cinnamon.	aloes, cinnamon, love
7	18	Come let us take our fill of love till morning let us delight ourselves with love	Come, let us take our fill of love till morning; let us delight ourselves with love.	husband, journey, money
7	19	For my husband is not at home he has gone on a long journey	For my husband is not at home; he has gone on a long journey;	seductive, speech, persuades
7	20	He took a bag of money with him at full moon he will come home	He took a bag of money with him; at full moon he will come home.	smooth, talk, compels
7	21	With much seductive speech she persuades him with her smooth talk she compels him	With much seductive speech she persuades him; with her smooth talk she compels him.	follows, slaughter, cost
7	22	All at once he follows her as an ox goes to the slaughter or as a stag is caught fast	All at once he follows her, as an ox goes to the slaughter, or as a stag is caught fast.	arrow, liver, snare
7	23	Till an arrow pierces its liver as a bird rushes into a snare he does not know that it will cost him his life	Till an arrow pierces its liver; as a bird rushes into a snare; he does not know that it will cost him his life.	bird, rushes, cost
7	24	And now O sons listen to me and be attentive to the words of my mouth	And now, O sons, listen to me, and be attentive to the words of my mouth.	sons, listen, mouth
7	25	Let not your heart turn aside to her ways do not stray into her paths	Let not your heart turn aside to her ways; do not stray into her paths,	heart, ways, stray
7	26	For many a victim has she laid low and all her slain are a mighty throng	For many a victim has she laid low, and all her slain are a mighty throng.	victim, laid, low
7	27	Her house is the way to Sheol going down to the chambers of death	Her house is the way to Sheol, going down to the chambers of death.	house, Sheol, death
8	1	Does not wisdom call Does not understanding raise her voice	Does not wisdom call? Does not understanding raise her voice?	wisdom, call, understanding, raise
8	2	On the heights beside the way at the crossroads she takes her stand	On the heights beside the way, at the crossroads she takes her stand;	heights, crossroads
8	3	beside the gates in front of the town at the entrance of the portals she cries aloud	beside the gates in front of the town, at the entrance of the portals she cries aloud:	gates, entrance, portals
8	4	To you O men I call and my cry is to the children of man	“To you, O men, I call, and my cry is to the children of man.	cry, children of man
8	5	O simple ones learn prudence O fools learn sense	O simple ones, learn prudence; O fools, learn sense.	prudence, learn, sense
8	6	Hear for I will speak noble things and from my lips will come what is right	Hear, for I will speak noble things, and from my lips will come what is right,	noble, right
8	7	for my mouth will utter truth wickedness is an abomination to my lips	for my mouth will utter truth; wickedness is an abomination to my lips.	truth, wickedness, abomination
8	8	All the words of my mouth are righteous there is nothing twisted or crooked in them	All the words of my mouth are righteous; there is nothing twisted or crooked in them.	mouth, righteous, twisted, crooked
8	9	They are all straight to him who understands and right to those who find knowledge	They are all straight to him who understands, and right to those who find knowledge.	knowledge
8	10	Take my instruction instead of silver and knowledge rather than choice gold	Take my instruction instead of silver, and knowledge rather than choice gold,	instruction, silver, knowledge, gold
8	11	for wisdom is better than jewels and all that you may desire cannot compare with her	for wisdom is better than jewels, and all that you may desire cannot compare with her.	wisdom, jewels, desire
8	12	I wisdom dwell with prudence and I find knowledge and discretion	“I, wisdom, dwell with prudence, and I find knowledge and discretion.	wisdom, prudence, knowledge, discretion
8	13	The fear of the Lord is hatred of evil Pride and arrogance and the way of evil and perverted speech I hate	The fear of the Lord is hatred of evil. Pride and arrogance and the way of evil and perverted speech I hate.	fear, evil, pride, arrogance, perverted
8	14	I have counsel and sound wisdom I have insight I have strength	I have counsel and sound wisdom; I have insight; I have strength.	counsel, wisdom, insight, strength
8	15	By me kings reign and rulers decree what is just	By me kings reign, and rulers decree what is just;	kings, reign, rulers, decree
8	16	by me princes rule and nobles all who govern justly	by me princes rule, and nobles, all who govern justly.	princes, nobles, rule, justly
8	17	I love those who love me and those who seek me diligently find me	I love those who love me, and those who seek me diligently find me.	love, seek, diligently
8	18	Riches and honor are with me enduring wealth and righteousness	Riches and honor are with me, enduring wealth and righteousness.	riches, honor, wealth, righteousness
8	19	My fruit is better than gold even fine gold and my yield than choice silver	My fruit is better than gold, even fine gold, and my yield than choice silver.	fruit, gold, silver
8	20	I walk in the way of righteousness in the paths of justice	I walk in the way of righteousness, in the paths of justice,	righteousness, justice
8	21	granting an inheritance to those who love me and filling their treasuries	granting an inheritance to those who love me, and filling their treasuries.	inheritance, love, treasuries
8	22	The Lord possessed me at the beginning of his work	“The Lord possessed me at the beginning of his work,	possessed
8	23	Ages ago I was set up at the first before the beginning of the earth	Ages ago I was set up, at the first, before the beginning of the earth.	beginning
8	24	When there were no depths I was brought forth when there were no springs abounding with water	When there were no depths I was brought forth, when there were no springs abounding with water.	depths, springs
8	25	Before the mountains had been shaped before the hills I was brought forth	Before the mountains had been shaped, before the hills, I was brought forth,	mountains, hills
8	26	before he had made the earth with its fields or the first of the dust of the world	before he had made the earth with its fields, or the first of the dust of the world.	earth, fields, dust
8	27	When he established the heavens I was there when he drew a circle on the face of the deep	When he established the heavens, I was there; when he drew a circle on the face of the deep,	heavens, deep
8	28	when he made firm the skies above when he established the fountains of the deep	when he made firm the skies above, when he established the fountains of the deep,	sky, fountains, deep
8	29	when he assigned to the sea its limit so that the waters might not transgress his command when he marked out the foundations of the earth	when he assigned to the sea its limit, so that the waters might not transgress his command, when he marked out the foundations of the earth,	sea, limit, command, foundations, earth
8	30	then I was beside him like a master workman and I was daily his delight rejoicing before him always	then I was beside him, like a master workman, and I was daily his delight, rejoicing before him always,	master, workman, delight, rejoice
8	31	rejoicing in his inhabited world and delighting in the children of man	rejoicing in his inhabited world and delighting in the children of man.	rejoice, inhabited, delight
8	32	And now O sons listen to me blessed are those who keep my ways	“And now, O sons, listen to me: blessed are those who keep my ways.	listen, blessed
8	33	Hear instruction and be wise and do not neglect it	Hear instruction and be wise, and do not neglect it.	instructions, wise, neglect
8	34	Blessed is the one who listens to me watching daily at my gates waiting beside my doors	Blessed is the one who listens to me, watching daily at my gates, waiting beside my doors.	blessed, listen, watching, waiting
8	35	For whoever finds me finds life and obtains favor from the Lord	For whoever finds me finds life and obtains favor from the Lord,	life, favor
8	36	but he who fails to find me injures himself all who hate me love death	but he who fails to find me injures himself; all who hate me love death.”	fail, injury, death
9	1	Wisdom has built her house she has hewn her seven pillars	Wisdom has built her house; she has hewn her seven pillars.	wisdom, building, foundation
9	2	She has slaughtered her beasts she has mixed her wine she has also set her table	She has slaughtered her beasts; she has mixed her wine; she has also set her table.	feasting, preparation, hospitality
9	3	She has sent out her young women to call from the highest places in the town	She has sent out her young women to call from the highest places in the town,	sending, invitation, proclamation
9	4	Whoever is simple let him turn in here To him who lacks sense she says	“Whoever is simple, let him turn in here!” To him who lacks sense she says,	calling, simplicity, guidance
9	5	Come eat of my bread and drink of the wine I have mixed	“Come, eat of my bread and drink of the wine I have mixed.	invitation, nourishment, celebration
9	6	Leave your simple ways and live and walk in the way of insight	Leave your simple ways, and live, and walk in the way of insight.”	transformation, growth, understanding
9	7	Whoever corrects a scoffer gets himself abuse and he who reproves a wicked man incurs injury	Whoever corrects a scoffer gets himself abuse, and he who reproves a wicked man incurs injury.	correction, response, consequence
9	8	Do not reprove a scoffer or he will hate you reprove a wise man and he will love you	Do not reprove a scoffer, or he will hate you; reprove a wise man, and he will love you.	reproof, discernment, affirmation
9	9	Give instruction to a wise man and he will be still wiser teach a righteous man and he will increase in learning	Give instruction to a wise man, and he will be still wiser; teach a righteous man, and he will increase in learning.	instruction, wisdom, development
9	10	The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom and the knowledge of the Holy One is insight	The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom, and the knowledge of the Holy One is insight.	reverence, knowledge, discernment
9	11	For by me your days will be multiplied and years will be added to your life	For by me your days will be multiplied, and years will be added to your life.	prolonging, life, blessing
9	12	If you are wise you are wise for yourself if you scoff you alone will bear it	If you are wise, you are wise for yourself; if you scoff, you alone will bear it.	self-responsibility, consequences, accountability
9	13	The woman Folly is loud she is seductive and knows nothing	The woman Folly is loud; she is seductive and knows nothing.	folly, deception, ignorance
9	14	She sits at the door of her house she takes a seat on the highest places of the town	She sits at the door of her house; she takes a seat on the highest places of the town,	presence, observation, elevation
9	15	calling to those who pass by who are going straight on their way	calling to those who pass by, who are going straight on their way,	calling, direction, path
9	16	Whoever is simple let him turn in here And to him who lacks sense she says	“Whoever is simple, let him turn in here!” And to him who lacks sense she says,	temptation, allure, indulgence
9	17	Stolen water is sweet and bread eaten in secret is pleasant	“Stolen water is sweet, and bread eaten in secret is pleasant.”	secrecy, pleasure, enticement
9	18	But he does not know that the dead are there that her guests are in the depths of Sheol	But he does not know that the dead are there, that her guests are in the depths of Sheol.	ignorance, danger, unawareness
10	1	The proverbs of Solomon A wise son makes a glad father but a foolish son is a sorrow to his mother	The proverbs of Solomon. A wise son makes a glad father, but a foolish son is a sorrow to his mother.	warning, consequences, darkness
10	2	Treasures gained by wickedness do not profit but righteousness delivers from death	Treasures gained by wickedness do not profit, but righteousness delivers from death.	Treasures, wickedness, righteousness, death
10	3	The Lord does not let the righteous go hungry but he thwarts the craving of the wicked	The Lord does not let the righteous go hungry, but he thwarts the craving of the wicked.	righteous, hungry, craving, wicked
10	4	A slack hand causes poverty but the hand of the diligent makes rich	A slack hand causes poverty, but the hand of the diligent makes rich.	slack, poverty, diligent, rich
10	5	He who gathers in summer is a prudent son but he who sleeps in harvest is a son who brings shame	He who gathers in summer is a prudent son, but he who sleeps in harvest is a son who brings shame.	prudent, harvest, shame
10	6	Blessings are on the head of the righteous but the mouth of the wicked conceals violence	Blessings are on the head of the righteous, but the mouth of the wicked conceals violence.	Blessings, righteous, wicked, violence
10	7	The memory of the righteous is a blessing but the name of the wicked will rot	The memory of the righteous is a blessing, but the name of the wicked will rot.	memory, righteous, blessing, wicked, rot
10	8	The wise of heart will receive commandments but a babbling fool will come to ruin	The wise of heart will receive commandments, but a babbling fool will come to ruin.	wise, commandments, fool, ruin
10	9	Whoever walks in integrity walks securely but he who makes his ways crooked will be found out	Whoever walks in integrity walks securely, but he who makes his ways crooked will be found out.	integrity, crooked
10	10	Whoever winks the eye causes trouble and a babbling fool will come to ruin	Whoever winks the eye causes trouble, and a babbling fool will come to ruin.	trouble, fool, ruin
10	11	The mouth of the righteous is a fountain of life but the mouth of the wicked conceals violence	The mouth of the righteous is a fountain of life, but the mouth of the wicked conceals violence.	righteous, life, wicked, violence
10	12	Hatred stirs up strife but love covers all offenses	Hatred stirs up strife, but love covers all offenses.	Hatred, strife, love, offenses
10	13	On the lips of him who has understanding wisdom is found but a rod is for the back of him who lacks sense	On the lips of him who has understanding, wisdom is found, but a rod is for the back of him who lacks sense.	understanding, wisdom, rod, sense
10	14	The wise lay up knowledge but the mouth of a fool brings ruin near	The wise lay up knowledge, but the mouth of a fool brings ruin near.	wise, knowledge, fool, ruin
10	15	A rich mans wealth is his strong city the poverty of the poor is their ruin	A rich man’s wealth is his strong city; the poverty of the poor is their ruin.	wealth, strong, poverty, poor, ruin
10	16	The wage of the righteous leads to life the gain of the wicked to sin	The wage of the righteous leads to life,  the gain of the wicked to sin.	righteous, life, wicked, sin
10	17	Whoever heeds instruction is on the path to life but he who rejects reproof leads others astray	Whoever heeds instruction is on the path to life, but he who rejects reproof leads others astray.	life, rejects, astray
10	18	The one who conceals hatred has lying lips and whoever utters slander is a fool	The one who conceals hatred has lying lips, and whoever utters slander is a fool.	hatred, lying, slander, fool
10	19	When words are many transgression is not lacking but whoever restrains his lips is prudent	When words are many, transgression is not lacking, but whoever restrains his lips is prudent.	transgression, restrains, prudent
10	20	The tongue of the righteous is choice silver the heart of the wicked is of little worth	The tongue of the righteous is choice silver; the heart of the wicked is of little worth.	righteous, silver, wicked, worth
10	21	The lips of the righteous feed many but fools die for lack of sense	The lips of the righteous feed many, but fools die for lack of sense.	righteous, fool
10	22	The blessing of the Lord makes rich and he adds no sorrow with it	The blessing of the Lord makes rich, and he adds no sorrow with it.	blessing, sorrow
10	23	Doing wrong is like a joke to a fool but wisdom is pleasure to a man of understanding	Doing wrong is like a joke to a fool, but wisdom is pleasure to a man of understanding.	fool, wisdom, pleasure
10	24	What the wicked dreads will come upon him but the desire of the righteous will be granted	What the wicked dreads will come upon him, but the desire of the righteous will be granted.	dreads, desire, righteous
10	25	When the tempest passes the wicked is no more but the righteous is established forever	When the tempest passes, the wicked is no more, but the righteous is established forever.	tempest, wicked, righteous
10	26	Like vinegar to the teeth and smoke to the eyes so is the sluggard to those who send him	Like vinegar to the teeth and smoke to the eyes, so is the sluggard to those who send him.	sluggard
10	27	The fear of the Lord prolongs life but the years of the wicked will be short	The fear of the Lord prolongs life, but the years of the wicked will be short.	prolongs, life, wicked
10	28	The hope of the righteous brings joy but the expectation of the wicked will perish	The hope of the righteous brings joy, but the expectation of the wicked will perish.	hope, joy, perish
10	29	The way of the Lord is a stronghold to the blameless but destruction to evildoers	The way of the Lord is a stronghold to the blameless, but destruction to evildoers.	stronghold, blameless, destruction
10	30	The righteous will never be removed but the wicked will not dwell in the land	The righteous will never be removed, but the wicked will not dwell in the land.	wicked, dwell
10	31	The mouth of the righteous brings forth wisdom but the perverse tongue will be cut off	The mouth of the righteous brings forth wisdom, but the perverse tongue will be cut off.	wisdom, perverse
10	32	The lips of the righteous know what is acceptable but the mouth of the wicked what is perverse	The lips of the righteous know what is acceptable, but the mouth of the wicked, what is perverse.	acceptable, wicked, perverse